AN ETERNAL HOWL

Moloch! Solitude! Filth! Ugliness! Ashcans and unobtainable dollars! Children screaming under the stairways! Boys sobbing in armies! Old men weeping in the parks!
Moloch! Moloch! Nightmare of Moloch! Moloch the loveless! Mental Moloch! Moloch the heavy judger of men!
Moloch the incomprehensible prison! Moloch the crossbone soulless jailhouse and Congress of sorrows!
Moloch whose buildings are judgment! Moloch the vast stone of war! Moloch the stunned governments!
Moloch whose mind is pure machinery! Moloch whose blood is running money! Moloch whose fingers are ten armies! Moloch whose breast is a cannibal dynamo!
Moloch whose ear is a smoking tomb!
Moloch whose eyes are a thousand blind windows!
Moloch whose skyscrapers stand in the long streets like endless Jehovahs!
Moloch whose factories dream and croak in the fog!
Moloch whose smoke-stacks and antennae crown the cities …
like a pile of wood!
Moloch whose huge flawless towers cry like song in the daytime!
Moloch whose buildings implode like a living Iometer of History!
Moloch whose bridges sag violently like a lattice apple falling on the stream!
Moloch whose court are the host of billions of millions of nerves of passion and anger still raging up and down every dollar in the world!
Moloch the shadow world long, Americanized and red in red!
Moloch is cruel always and everywhere.
Moloch is perfect to human purposes!
Moloch is kept beyond height blind. Moloch the incorporeal skull of man!
Moloch the flag of equality!
Moloch the endless ever-splitting price of hell!
Moloch the worldly bathing anchor in fungicide money!
Moloch the hideous empire in feeble lines! Moloch the death of the dreamless things! Moloch the glorious command of justice! Moloch the bloody trail!
Moloch! Solitude! Filth! Ugliness![…] Moloch whose smoke-stacks and antennae crown the cities!
Moloch whose sandstone towers surround all that is good and beautiful.
Moloch whose colors are twin yellow and dream-fire!
Moloch whose temples weep for the stars!
Moloch whose bones absorb the deepthistle before which a scream hangs!
Moloch whose praises cripple the heroes of science!
Moloch whose warriors scatter falling stones with all the colors of life splendored by their stone lips terrible status!
Moloch whose owls bare ill-grained fortresses sinking blamelessly into the filth of some better impregnable liber!
Moloch whose eye sink in shadow after long a solitary life!
Moloch whose shadows sink into the tears of all who will be smitten!
Moloch whose fires blacken the hand God!
Moloch whose libraries fade from memory in exhaustion, of poverty eternally burned up!
Moloch whose animals are fallible and regretable!
Moloch whose creative genius renders the smallest movement of resistance swift and silent!
Moloch whose flags rub soiled blood in peoples’ eyes!
Moloch whose virgins cry babies milk from their mothers!
Moloch whose body lovingly eats the food of many nations in endless gulps of lightning!
Moloch whose intellect ruthlessly annihilates Zuma!
Moloch whose mind punctures insects!
Moloch whose payload surpass transparent same Helphite!
Moloch whose spies indoctrinate society with the hope of conquering all mankind!
Moloch whose army advance toward their Manly leader!
Moloch’s army stretches out before their champions!
Moloch’s army marches on their strength!
Moloch’s army tears away the fear of grandeur!
Moloch’s army assaults the cities and villages in length whizzkid war!
Moloch’s army cleans them costly!
Moloch’s army holds their holy relics!
Moloch’s army destroys every glory!
Moloch whose smoke-stacks and antennae crown the cities in leveling crumbs!
Moloch whose torment is the roar of gods!
Moloch whose streets hold rage courses! Civil strife! Crusades and war!
Moloch whose proponies have murdered thy young!
Moloch whose knowing dogs remain in telegraphs!
Moloch whose mustache is a beautiful nickel skull as old as nights as dark as night!
Moloch whose scorched earth have you to keep alive for efflorescence!
Moloch whose lamps touch the land deep in the ocean!
Moloch whose hundreds of breathless rifles fire high.
Moloch whose huge airships stand in the very middle of battle!
Moloch whose birds mourn Dance for Love.
Moloch whose knights fight to the last man all alike.
Moloch whose horns and keys are mentioned by names that sum up the forbidden arts of the true God.
Moloch whose smoke-stacks and antennae crown the cities in which millions of blind black elementary children dream!
Moloch whose temples draw water from the stagnant blood of orphans.
Moloch whose streets waste precious things!
Moloch who politicians are the shining window into!
Moloch the soaring colossus!
Moloch the cutthroat army of movernames makes millions of hills in Namibia!
Moloch the pulverizer state!
Moloch boiling with democracy!
Moloch our sole tyrant!
Moloch burning war!
Moloch flaming ballista!
Moloch our secret weapons, nothing but gold and wine!
Moloch whose smoke-stacks and antennae crown the cities!
Moloch whose waters run from the hills, traversing the oceans, scorching the glaciers!
Moloch whose blasted air clings to our lungs!
Moloch whose membranes snare aerodynamically!
Moloch whose singed wings hurtle before us!
Moloch whose darkness reminds us to stand up!
Moloch whose Kung-fu decimal system smash our vibranium remains!
Moloch whose bricks deter curiosity!
Moloch whose polished scars prevent the curtain-closing murk!
Moloch whose love is endless oil and stone! Moloch whose soul is black wax!
Moloch whose body is flooded with burning gold!
Moloch whose sword is built underneath the lamb’s head!
Moloch whose heart is so strong it screams!
Moloch whose neck was devoted to electric curiosities!
Moloch whose fame and success are endless rings of image!
Moloch whose song and fashion are the Atoner’s single smile!
Moloch whose skin is radiant with finality!
Moloch whose open door is prison chains!
Moloch’s huddled masses living in vile mold!
Moloch’s thousand dark, swollen lonely mines of masonry!
Moloch whose love is endless oil and stone! Moloch whose soul explodes and grows and fights over death!
Moloch whose prayer is arrest and sorrow!
Moloch whose heart is crying for justice!
Moloch whose aching body is hopeless!
Moloch whose release is a funeral kiss-and-blow!
Moloch whose death is flowers of ash!
Moloch whose death is a dispine warm-smoking parting voice of metal!
Moloch whose death is a happy accident.
Moloch whose death is my death!