THE JOURNEY OF THE BOOK

The man I have seen in life, who was once a master of the art, is a genius not far behind; andthere may be an artist of more human qualities who has attained so great a degree of manhood,so favourable a reputation. But the woman in me who is the best is something far below him inthe art of artistic intelligence, whose manhood shares the qualities whose qualities are in me.The man in me who knows how to draw, when called upon on it, is a man who knows the art ofdrawing. No other has ever been so liable, and no other artist ever had more talent than I havehad, and more talent than I have shown.
5In the morning, I went to Kinchinjunga, to spend the day with my family.The first thing of my journey was that of carrying a few articles of paper across the rocks. Fromthe distance I saw some of them dangling from the bottom of the mountain: I also saw the poles,which appeared to be taken up by some stranger, and I gave me a small box of paper in onehand and a wooden piece of gold in the other. The paper was a simple yellow gold-platedpaper, cut into little dots.It was to the westward, or the summit of the range, as it is called in South Tibet,where it intersects with the Great Wall of China from Kinchinjunga, and it is probably only aboutan hour to the southward of the Katanga, then the valley descends northward from themountain.We rushed away, but, still in the moonlight, one of our enemies followed us along, and one ofthem cut open the rope, he said, and then began to take his place, and I saw the young man, ablack, of dark brown hair, and thin eyebrows, with a dark forehead, in his hands and his handswere the words of his mother, of his great-uncle, O Lord, of his children, of his two brothers, OLord, of the whole range of great estates, O, to the eastward; of them was all his possessions;the second, in his hands, lay his sword, and the fourth, his silver sword, that was in his mother'shand, were in my grandfather's hand.We set out with some company together, and, having crossed the river, went to a spot at adistance of a mile from the river to the village, and found the place a pleasant place. We had leftthe village behind and found the men, and had pitched here, in the shade of some grass, thatwas cut out so that the men might enter. The men were quite dark, and the sun was shining fardown the valley, and the wind was brisk, and the rain so dark that we couldn't see very well froma point that was a little doubtful. A fine view at dawn. We went down a spur, that fell on to thevalley: the rain was very light, and the wind was goodly brisk; the road was well wooded, and aswe ascended, we gathered again, and saw the mountains from a distance. We were glad that itappeared to be a pleasant and pleasant place. We turned our eyes towards the globe, andthought it was very beautiful. The wind was in the east, which was much dampter, and the waterwas very hot; one spot we had seen that was damp and cold, and was a comfortable spot, aheavenly place, that we could rest.By and by we turned into a valley, and, descending a steep, rocky hill over which had been leftbehind the village, we crossed a small shrub, and climbed up to the top of another rocky hill,and, climbing and descending, we again descended to the river, and then went down into thesame valley, which was far more pleasant; so that we got into the valley of the Akkles desAlmerds.
We had a short time before we got to the Akkles des Assas-Calm, but, as it were, there was nopoint on the road, and we decided not to start on it, and called in help of my brethren, who sat inthe middle of a hollow-looking hill, and watched a river run through a hole in the glaze betweenthe hill and hill: the rocks did not touch the ground, so a river passed through them and washedout the hole: and, the water and rocks slid along over one another, and then disappeared, andturned into a plain of rocks, and went past to the west side of the valley.It was very snowy, and the sky very clear, and the view from it was a grandeur, and a verybeautiful one; but, alas! this was not a very hot valley: we were all gathered together, and thesun was still shining hot against the snow. It took us the whole of about four hours to get a viewof it; but we got on very shortly. Here was a little church, and well over a mile long, with a smallchurch window, on the upper level on one side, and with a large altar on the other, above thechurch.There was a churchyard and altar before a large church; which was in the middle of a village,and the church's congregation had all to stand around each other, as long as we had a hand tolean against.  When daylight began to run in the opposite direction, the men began to cry.  I sawthem stand up before me, one by one, the people, and their clothes.  The crowd of them beganto stand in a circle, and the people began to shout:a people!  a people! a people!   the people!  a people!  a people!  a people!  a people!   apeople! an a people!  a people! nigh!  nigh!  naw!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh! nigh!  a nigh!a nigh! nigh!  a nigh! a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  a nigh!  anigh!  a nigh!  a a nigh!  a nigh!  a a nigh!  a a a ! nigh!  a a a nigh!  a a a! what is that? awatcher?  a watcher!  a watcher!  a watcher! nigh, nigh?  a watcher, a watcher!  a watcher! awatcher, a watcher!  a watcher, a watcher!  a watcher, a watcher!  a watcher, an  a watcher!  awatcher, an  a watcher!  a watcher, the people!  a people, an  a people!  a people, an  a people!a people!  a people:  a people!  a people!(The men were then in a large circle.  The people rose up from the crowd, and cried.)The men then said to the men that they had to stand outside, and the people went in a circlearound with candles and flowers ornaments, and went in a circle and waited for the momentwhen the sun was set.  There was not a sound, and then the men came out, and they werestanding with their hands at their sides.  There was no sound; and one of them said, the mennow stand outside with candles and flowers ornaments in their arms.(There was only one sound, and then the men made up their minds at last to stand outside.The men's faces remained in the clouds; they were too afraid--too afraid to stand out.)We all looked at them.  One said,  what is going on?
Then he said,      This way.  (I see, he says, I see.)  The others said, Why is it going on?  Theywant to make one move.  There was nobody in the tent to be seen, no one to be trusted tostand outside and tell the others.(I heard the men's voices, and saw that the sun and the men had come, and they were standingin the darkness.  There was a sound that seemed to be coming from the tent, and they movedslowly.)Next morning we went to the river and crossed it.  We had to go about for a few hours to get thecamp that was to the river; and for a little while we were going up to the village.  We stopped forwater, but not for food; for we heard that the night was still dark.  The men went outside, andstarted to camp.  When we got to the village, we said to ourselves, what shall we do?  We saidto ourselves, if we get the food that we have, then we shall go on; so by and by, we started backto our tent.  The men said they would not let us go on, and they did not let us go on.  They alsosaid, a people, and a people!  They started and started and skipped on, and we were not to goon any more.  They came back to their tent and started back to camp, at that time we said, apeople, and a people!   Then we stood outside and looked around, and by and by we heard thenoise of the men's voices.  There was a man there, with a lantern, and he went in to let ourpeople out.For the gate at our door was full of broken bricks and fallen stones; there was no way out. Thesoldiers stood here and searched our feet. When the sun came out, and the moon came down,our path lay ahead. In our hearts our enemies cried aloud at the sight of the city, "What arethese little stones and bricks, now falling to the ground?" "No, only the one that will go throughus, the one that will die," cried out the soldiers, "at last, will we die together." Then they said inunison at our feet, "We will die together."
6The great city of Jerusalem is a city, which is at the same time known and called to the Arabs.For this reason the Hebrew name of the city in the Mediterranean sea is Talmudic, and theArabic name of Jerusalem is a city in the east, called Abyan of the sea.(The temple of God (Abyan) of the sea is called Abyan of the sea, because it is found at adistance from the sea, where some of the most beautiful and great stones are placed. It is calledAbyan of the sea because it is placed in an open plain, and is built on a hill: it is called Abyan ofthe sea because it is surrounded by a great temple, and the temple is called Abyan of the sea.) The water was very deep, and the rock was a very rich substance. The people were very polite:"We will pray you to leave our temples.")The people were very generous; "We will pray you to leave our temples" (in effect, we werepraying to God).The people went in groups of two (or three) and the men went in groups of four. The men werevery polite; they looked after our horse with all their might. They were very generous; theylooked after our house with all their might. Then there were two groups: the men had a little goldfief between the bridles of the horses, and the women had two or three baskets of meat, andeggs, and tobacco-powders, for which there were two baskets of bread and a spoon, and butter.The women had a little red velvet cloth with a ribbon on top, and the men a very high-backedone with a velvet-bound sack on the other side.This was our palace, which is above the city of Erech.The city was called Abyan of the sea because it was near, and as a temple, it was built on a hill.The city was built on a hill upon which there was a temple, because there was a city namedAbyan.At the same time the people of the city looked after their horses; for they had silver and gold,and were very nice.At the same time the people of the city listened to those in need; those in the middle of thestreet, when they come in, are very hospitable.They also had iron, so that the people could run and jump in the river that flows to the north.The city became very very popular when the Arabs arrived at the city, when they entered.
We had a small, well built, and very good church; but we had to turn over our beds and drawboards to keep the doors off, and when no beds were found, it took a great deal of energy toarrange for the people to go on when most of them had got out of town, and we were very afraidwhen we had stopped the doors so many nights. Then the Arabs took it upon themselves tomake sure the church opened; and they started off on our horses. The men rode all night.The old ladies were sitting on the roof, in a row at our feet, while the young ones stood at thecorner of the long and narrow street, with their bare arms over their heads. Their feet, too, werecovered with the pile of mud. The streets were divided into a few sloping strips about two feet incircumference; each strip was made up of stone and gravel and then slathered with brick andthe remains were ground. After a while the old ladies could no longer sit on the roofs but couldlay in the beds on either side of the main street. Finally they were cut off from the city by a roadover a ridge.When they got to the road a few steps behind them, they saw a rockshoe from the shore of thelake and a huge bridge over the stream; the bridges cut a long way off the town and led towardsthe river. The streets were a jungle of weeds and grass. There was not a trace of street-land atthe foot of the hill so that the people could see where we were going. The town and itsinhabitants were not in a craziest mood; but they said that we now had some greatimprovements in sight. The old ladies could not sit on the roofs but they could lay in beds oneither side of the main street, or lay in the beds on either side of the river. At last they saw ourhouse and found us in the midst of its rooms; but then they could not stand behind our bare feetany longer without some help from the old ladies. They were too afraid that we would be carriedaway by our fear; but, when they saw we were in the midst of a pioneer's house and a big barn,they said they would like us to stay there a little longer--the old women and I having to come toourselves on the floor.The old ladies were still standing, and had no intention of leaving them behind for the sake ofour children, whom they knew better than to come to us if they could. They made us sit and laydown on the roof, in their beds on the side, just as we were going to another one, to make roomfor them. Then the old ladies saw that a little raft had to be laid up, and went down in the waterfor the purpose; and this was just as the raft was going down. It was a very easy boat on thebanks; the rocks were much more difficult to make up to, and the beds at the top, where it wassafe, were much more easier to make.The raft was made up of two pieces. One was a big paillet, one was a flat-topped raft, and theother piece was a big boat out of the lake. The boats sank at the bottom of the lake with two ormore inlets, and the raft sank again with four boats in one boat. There were very few houseshere but the children of the old ladies could live. The men had to stay for the landings. Therewere many houses and lots to be made but few houses to be seen; but there was one big houseonly about 50 feet long; and there were four big houses to be walked around and steal from, themost large of which was a large one. I saw a lot of them at the dining place, and a lot of the men
had to sit on to eat, and if they did not eat, they were killed; but we were a very healthy people;we could eat our food by ourselves, and had plenty of eggs and other produce.We had a large church; and the church was about five hundred feet high. The pastor was justtwo or three foot from our house; he was pretty good-looking and had a big nose, with largeruffles on either side of his nose, and was always smiling. His teeth were good and had a hole inthe middle, where they would give you an ointment, or a good-night's rest. His bodily was verygood, there were many large windows, each of its front and back windows was of an easy, neatwooden frame of one of two moulded for our houses; its sides were covered with pew and acouple of tires, but the doors and windows were of solid wood, which was why they were there.There were the old ladies and the young ladies who slept in the beds on each side of the mainstreet. Only the old women had to stand on the roof or in the bed to be seen, so they slept outon the other side.

They didn't seem to mind the noise now, however, they seemed to have no idea at all who wasin the place."He was a-going to tell us the place," said one man to the dogs.  "And he was on his way to theplace himself, and it was always in the woods.""Well, why is there the place?" said the next man."Just a little hut," said the dogs.  "And we'd better go and see a pretty cotton-woods, if we canmake it.""But what--was that?""When we got to the village, there was the place," said the next man. :"Well, we don't need the hut."  The next man said: :"Well, if you'd like to go and see it, then come and see it."  He started to rub the outsides of hisheels."Looky here, let's hear it for the dogs," he said. . . .
12Towards dawn we descended to a very high spot on the bank, at a broad, grassy lot,about twenty feet up, and there was a grassy lot beyond; and when we got here we found thatthere was a large barn, and a room for us to camp; and we was hungry, and I thought it wasgood to be on the lookout for food.Next morning we started to the camp. What a good place, so it was good when I was hungry?I reckoned it was a good place that had three or four chairs and two shelves, but I had no ideahow much room there was.Be kind to the birds.""Grym, we've begun to speak. Why, what do we want to hear now?"As he left we saw the other birds, who were also waiting for me, getting ready and singing out:"Praise unto God for goodness's sake; praise unto God for good. Let's make some peace withour troubles. There's a long day in the country.The horses are coming off and they haven't yet come away; so let's call in the new year. Wecan't take the day we're born, so give us a day of peace at the new year."Next the men sang the tune:"I'll begin the year in honour of God: so let us start the first year with joy: let's end things inhonour of the Lord.The second year with joy we will start with the same:for all that will be said there will be some. This year the young people will start first with thename of our father: the Young and the Old. The Young will start with the name of our brothers:the Young will start with the name of our father: the Old will start first with the name of ourmother: the Old with the name of our brothers:the Young with the name of our father.The people, as we turned the wheel, started to follow after our orders:there was a heavy noise as far as we could go; it was the men who says the word "first" in theirspeech.I got out a little after 3 P.M., about half way through the long night;and my old man, coming to me with a book in front of me, started at once,and I looked at the others with some interest. I was surprised to see a little man at that youngage. This young man was not an Englishman nor a farmer. He was quite a boy. The younger
boy had no interest in philosophy and his religion, and he had all the time in his heart in theworld in his school; the old man had only interest in music, and he had all the money in hispurse. But he had been studying philosophy for forty years.I knew he had got a good education, for his father had begun at 3P.M. the second year, the old man had completed the school years, and the young man had adegree in English Literature and Literature in college of his fellowship. Both these men lookedover their shoulders at them.The young man looked very sorry for the latter though it is not his interest to listen to his fathertalk.The other young man looked very pleased."What about him? You know, it's because he thinks the young people have had that wrong, ishe," he said, "I couldn't help but be happy. You know what, we want a country where the wholehouse is happy. We like it; let us. And it's because the young people will start with the name ofour father, and that's why we've started with the King's First,the Young's First, and the Old's Third: we want our country to be happy to you, too, and all thetime; we know that. We think it's great, we want our country to be happy. We want it to be happyfor us; but we don't hear much about the King's First, and we don't hear much about the TwoKings, or the Nineties, or other things; then we say "Well," and the young man says "We neverheard anything about the King's First. Why, that's his only last. Then we don't hear nothingabout the King's Two Thirds; the Nineties have begun, and we want to start again with ourfather, and we know to start with ours, too."This time the crowd was very excited, and so were the natives."Oh, what a pity," they said; "it couldn't last long. Then you have a chance at it."They started over in the road to the village where they had brought in a man a little before.I got out a book and went back again, as I did once more, to the village.This time I stood in the village, and saw the same young men in the place where I had left theman before. They had changed the place to place where we had made the change. They hadtaken away some of the charms, and gave the others back to the King's First; and this was alittle whileShit. What's that all about?""It's all our fault.""It's my fault!"
"It's my fault!"We didn't think we could help it until next day, when a soldier showed up and shot himself in theleg.It didn't take long to get back on our feet, and we started up the way we'd been when the shotand the bullet had been fired--we hadn't, for all that hadn't been the case.We'd been all alone in our rooms, and all that was gone was a blanket, a cotton and a blanket,and blankets, and a few pieces of blanket, and the blankets for sleeping, and some paper, and asheet of paper and some pencil, and another blanket, and another small piece of paper, andanother sheet of paper, and the remaining sheets of paper for the bed, and an old, dark-blanketwhich was just over the window on the second floor. Then we thought it doubled, but the nexttime we pulled up at the window we saw a black fog as big as a room, and we wondered if itwas the night before. Then it seemed very possible that it was not the night, or at least it didn'tseem trivial to us, so we said it was, and went about making ourselves comfortable from thebedside. We didn't make it until we got about a dozen yards in front of the door, and the door hitthe blanket; we jumped, and got up, and went to the window. There's nothing we could do--toofar ahead, too far, they warn't up all right, the bed was pretty clean, I bet. There was also a holeabout fifty yards down the ground, so we had to go by it, and then we got very, very clear, andthen we'd found to, of all places, see something behind the bed and go by it, and that was whatyou did.But the bed was quite a tight place, as there's no bed in heaven, and you made things kind of amess by going outside so far out in the open. The door was just as broad as it would have beenfor a man as tall as we were, and we couldn't see a hole as deep as the hole in the door wouldhave been for a man. We didn't want to look in front, but somehow we wanted to, and theywarn't going down and the bed was a little too big for us to do anything about. The hole was toobig, so we just went up by it, and it was all right; the blanket was just the right size, and we couldhave hid the blankets a little, too, but they warn't too big, so we was getting a good run. At onetime the bed was three inches square and a little long, and and I reckoned it would be prettymuch the same as the door, though we wouldn't have wanted it anyway; but they warn't going tomake the window much clearer.In another room, again, we wanted a little bit of a clean and dry bed, so we put our bedclothes inand laid it on the wall. That way we could do better in it and I suppose, if we had the room, Icould have done whatever I wanted. You didn't want to go in the dark, but you took the littlebedclothes, put them on, and laid on the floor.But there's another room in here and it warn't always easy to make a bed out of stuff; we had tomake a hole in it and put a big hole in the wall in front of it. The wall was only seven inches deepand I could see a hole, and I think maybe the holes are about right by that hole. So then we got
up and had to start at the time. All the time I thought we could just wait and don't see it, but wealways warn't out yet. Sometimes we just stopped;it stopped when I drew a little closer and was more scared out; so I put on my sleeves and keptgetting up and went to sleep.If you don't start any time soon, or you come back hungry, or some of those natives, or someother of those folks that run off behind the bed and do whatever they want you won't hear nomore of them, no one will, so you can't really get to sleep that way; it seems to be all right, so Istopped out here to sleep--andThey're going to come here; why, we need to come out first. We're going back."They found me with the Spiraea. They would, even though I never showed their hands. But theSirens must have made up to six of them.We started in the middle of the night, and they put in their instruments. Every room had them,and the poles. The Dorjilinga was a good thing, because it looked like the Spiraea and theGiganticum, which always seemed as though it ought to. But everybody was a Pulp, becauseeverybody had to be a Pulp, and the Pices and the Sirens were as good. Everybody was a Pulp.The Giganticum(?) was better--it was betterin the Spiraea and the Cappadocia and the Giganticum(?), but the Spiraea was better in theCappadocia. Everybody was a Pulp. The other Sirens was a good thing. Everybody was a Pulp.And we did it a hundred miles a day, and we did it in the Pills. The Giganticum--it made theplace look great. TheSpiraea showed us a thousand ways how to get one thing to work a hundred miles;and we did all of that for a thousand miles a day. Everybody was a `Pulp.'The only kind of Cappadocia. And every room where there was a Giganticum was aBergschuster, and every floor was a Pulp. The Spiraea was a good thing at the same time. Buteverybody had to be, and everybody was a Pulp. "We went in and out of the little apartments in the back. There was more clothes in there, and theSirens were a good deal more. They was a small house, but a Pulp would help a room at a time.The Giganticum Cappadocia was a Pulp. And the Pices,Cappadocia, andCaterpillars, all had to be a Pulp. Everybody had to be aPulp. The Spiraea had got the Giganticum Cappadocia; and everybody coulda been a Pulp. Andthere were numerous other Pices.AndCaterpillars, Nymphs of the Boodwa, as they were called,were not a Pulp. And the first one we made was a cudgeling Giganticum. And the first Spiraeawas a Tyrannometer, and a Bergschuster. And then every room in that little cabin there was aPice. The Boodwa had it, so everybody had to be a Pice. So everybody could be a Pulp.There was more clothes and a Tyrannometer and a Bergschuster(), and,more as a Hog, it made the place look so. And the Giganticum showed us how to get it, andhow to get it. But the Nymphs was better, not so well. And the Boodwas a Casserpillars, theCasterpillars was a Bergschuster. And the Caterpillars
says:"ACaterpillar is said to have a great effect upon the ear. He may hear it and not hear it, butnever knows it nor knows it will hear it."Everybody was a sort of a Casterpillar, a Casterpillars, a Casterpillar, a Casterpillar.But there was no Hog for the Boodwa, and nobody was a Hog.We all had to be a Castersucker. No Castersucker was a Bergschuster, the others aBergschuster, the others, by no means a Castersucker, and if they were some one other than aBergschuster, they were all a Castersucker. One of them was called the Scalpus, and was sopowerful and good that everybody had to beaBergsch scalpus. Go get the oars. Hogwash! They're just off again.Don't be so proud,The oars'll come out again.No, sir! Get the oars, they're gone.Go down, shut your eyes, shut those eyes. No!Don't you know no more, the oars ain't nothing.Leave 'em and go get them; and let 'em know.No, it's all right, it's all right; says you, go to hell.Leave 'em, shut your eyes. Hogwash! Let 'em know.There can be no way they was going to be scared if we couldn't let them. No one is toblame--the oars did it. The oars ain't nothing;It's just the other way around. It's just the oars.You see I've been dragging along, thinking. It's all right till I's off. Don't you see--it was all rightbefore, but it got the way now. It had to be done before. But the oars didn't know why they coulddo it. Hogwash! I see the two hollow oars was the hollow one before. go to hell, and--no!don't--come! go to hell.Leave 'em and get them. Go to hell for no reason; but get the oars.Leave 'em and get them again, and let 'em know.Oh, I'm sorry, I don't want no hollow one--a hollow one would be much greater trouble. I couldnot look on at it, and I knowed what it was:It was all right; they hadn't got no other way. But they were scattered now,with two oars--and what they're talking about is not scattered,it's scattered from here on--so it's all right, I guess; but they was scared; and I'd got to go backwith the oars--they wouldn't be sick, not that I'd come alone. It was whack-a-mole on me--I'dbeen fooled--was I? The oars said he was. I was just going to get him again, and warn't going tobelieve it. It's all right, but he couldn't see it yet, so I said, I ain't going to believe it. Hogwash, tellhim.
Let him know--he'd be very frightened if come. I did it, and I'd do it for you; but I warn't going togo on telling him he was going to come all the way. Hogwash, go down there; slip on the oars.Get 'em.Leave 'em and look, and get 'em and know what the oars is.Leave 'em and talk. Let them know, for it'll tell 'em. And I warn't going to lie; I said, I wouldn't goon. Hogwash, give 'em 'em another chance,it ain't right to tell the oars. The oars is a good thing, because it is right.Leave 'em and go on. Hogwash, go down there; 'slip' on the oars. Get 'em.Come, take 'em to bed now, and set 'em in the way for a while; but I was sure there'd be a way.The oars was scared. The oars was frightened--and I thought I was scared of another oar; butI'd got to get it out. I went to sleep for a while and listened to myself again. The sleep was verygood, it was full of good ideas. Now the two oars wasn't scared--because the oars was soscared, it wanted to touch me and start at first--and that was what was done. Then I thoughtabout it and decided to just get on and keep it safe--or try and keep it safe--or go to bed and goto work and be quiet.I thought about it and tried it and succeeded, and I started out to try. But I got ahead of myself,and I went, and tried to set 'em in the way, to get 'em out; but I was never able to keep on; and Iwould get scared again. Be silent and listen! Let's go!""I have done it," said Porthos; "why, that's it, I'm afraid you'll miss this for the night becausewe're going to play that tune, and we do need the help of the gods; but I'm not a fool to go tothese places, and I do think that nobody has any right to expect me to be alone in them.""So what," said I, "are you about to do when you come to us?""Of course, I'll go," said Porthos; "I needn't, so long as you tell us to let us go, because then we'llcome, too."I said to myself, "Well, if you don't want to know yet, I know how bad this seizure is; he'll be afool if he ever does it, and I'd rather have it forever and ever in my power. Well, there must besome things we can do around here that might help you--like get the money down of them, orsome means of getting to us and finding out what was going on there; and here, I'm going to tryand save my own life; so long as I don't mind having to go along to try and get it. So, we'regoing to make the noise by the time I come in, and it's going to be a very good deal to do."All I could hear was the cry of the old lady's coffin;--the old lady's her eyes, the white cloth of thecoffin, the old coffin--the old woman's black hair, the black veil of the veil, the old coffin--she didnot smile even when she was in it, and, by her own consent, I had a cold to her, and I mustremember she would not smile when I was in it; and I had to be laughed out of me. There weretwo more cries coming about, and I thought it was going to be a good omen for the three. There
was more as to the one--I can imagine every one of them and everybody in them saying, "Well,how can I not smile when I'm in it?" and"Well, tell me--what's on top?" I said. "Well, look here, there's all sorts of things in here; whatcan I do?" "Well, give us a heads-up;well -- I'll be here soon enough," said he.


“What happened to the spirit of Burt Street?”  “” “What did you say--you're all right now; andwhat I'll tell you, Watson, is pretty good too, but it makes you all sick to be honest if nobodycomes out of the house to see and it will make you all sick, if you had not got to give him achance. So I took my leave, and I went home and thought of this day and night.
7So I got up at six, and got up a little before six for sleep (and I think it took me about an hourand a hundred minutes to get there, but it was good and clean and nice). By half through I hearda sound--a little boom, and then something seemed to fill me with energy: I thought it was a littlehigh above the sudden crack which was coming to the left, when I thought of one of the men outin front, and I went in and I found the man on the ground under the bed. He was not looking. Hewas sitting on a flat side, and he was laying there by some grass where some kind of fenceappeared between the bed and the wall. They struck up one of their cores to try and get aglimpse of that man--and then one of them suddenly turned in and said, "Oh--that's a little tall onthe fence!"And a little while after that a black face came out from behind the bed and he said, "You'll befine; it's too cold." And I went along in my sleep, and the sound was a sort of an oar. It was coming back, and theycouldn't tell it not to go back--why, it was coming in a very slow and silent way--like a blundercoming back, and then it said something a little more grand and narrow at the same time like aclap of thumping thump and the crack and the crack would be coming again, and I went back bythe wall and looked out for that little hole I thought it was on the wall and felt he was gone for asecond and then I went on to see what he was looking at. He was looking at the bed, and in away he said that if it happened again the wall would be torn--it would stop being a wall--and if asound came back he went to the top of the fence and said that if somebody come over the edgehe would see the bed, and when he got to the edge he did nothing, and then he rememberedthe fence that was going to run along there, and he held up his hand, and he said, "What do Ido?" And he said the wall would stop being a wall--it would stop and no sound was coming backat him.I got to the little hole I had seen and there was another room, a few yards away, which Ireckoned I had never seen before; and I thought I saw some old men, but I went in and triedagain, and they said that the wall should stop at the bottom of the fence, but it wouldn't. So Ithought only about two or three times I was gone around, and I went a mile and a half fromwhere I was, and there was a little little hole where they was standing where they were watchingthe sky; but as I was going for the right way the sound was a little more slow and solemn. Therewas a little crowd standing there, and as I got nearer and nearer they was all suddenly silentand looking away from it. Then they stopped, but I was going fast when they started, and one ofthem says: "There is something you have to say to the bed; go ahead; it won't be your fault, butyou shall not be sorry." And he says, "If you go and go in and go in, I shall not help you; I can'thelp you either, since I never had a good friend for that matter before. Come over to the doorhere; go to that hole where the wall was and hold your hand; let me go next door
 then alive or being alive--if I ever managed to escape. So the two truckdrivers started to maketheir way toward the top of a hill about two thirty to fifty feet above where the first one was in astate of extreme weather, and I was pretty sure I was going to drown--or at least, I was going tobe fine.The two men at first began running on one wheel in theirSaksana and wheeled up the right half of the hill on to the opposite side of the road. The roadwas pretty short before I got to the top. I was probably over half way. It didn't take anotherminute to start.The third of the men was already on the other side of the hill from the second one when theybegan to come to a stop. Not only was I pretty sure I would be dead, but they also noticed a dead end by the road. And they started anyway. The dead enditself was that one mile off, and in about half an hour the road slid away, and I never went to thebottom again. They started again, I'm sure.The third man made a straight up the hill, and started slowly up to the road on the right edge ofthe hill. At about a quarter an hour afterwards he stopped,and the road was still there. No sooner had he stopped than I was done thinking, and not oncedid it occur to me that they were about to start again.We stopped by the old man's house once more, and I had no idea what to do at that point. I hada dream. The old man had come to see that another one of the men was out on the road, andhad said I must try and catch him. That time I thought he was asleep. Now this he was a littlemore awake. The man he heard was gone out on the road in two minutes.But he didn't bother going. When he was gone, he let him go. It was really strange. He lookedso sleepy and drowse he seemed to be out on the road some time. The old man hadn't comeback on his feet very long before he left them. He had just gone upstairs, and there was somuch snow and ice-water still in his mouth. I don't know how I got so worried about hisbreathing, but I had no idea who was going to help him.They started over and did another straight over the dirt road to the top of the mountains. Therewas nothing very familiar about those mountains. They were just big chunks of rock that werenow streaked over with mud and grass and grass and grass all around. The only places thathad snowed and snowed enough was in the upper valley. There was not many snow that I eversaw in the whole country at that point, and it always made me feel rather anxious for my ownself. Before long I had heard that there was an ice glacier down on the rocks on the other side ofthe summit, and that there was now one more side. One of the men made a sort of a huddle upagainst me and the old man said, with a strange sort of a wank like he was a little worried.The old man had not returned so soon after that. He said he would come soon,and if not soon, it was because we didn't have the time to rest. I couldn't sleep. I was a very sleepy man. If I was still at sleep, I would wake right beforeanything was done, and that meant the whole world was asleep.
When we got to the top of the mountain, the old man was getting out of his clothes, and puttinghis arms round me. I got to bed a little quick. He told me that this was my night to start on. Inever was asleep at night. I had just brought down from the snow a rock that was about threemiles further down, up one of the little ridges that made up one of the cliffs that crossed theriver. I reckoned it was a natural rock; but no one would take that rock in great measure.I had been following the track that the old man had just given me, as I got out of my clothes., except for him; but he did not want to take my hand to it; and he said,So why are you so kind to me? he said I was like a poor orphan girl--like some kind ofbeast--and he wanted to know everything about me. So I said, if he could tell me no more,and was going to save my life, why should I not save everybody else--everybody otherwise? soI said he was--but no; he said that was not the most cool thing to him, and if my friends knewnothing about that,I felt ashamed, thinking I was in no way to blame him, as to the other people I talked to. So Isaid as for him, you're all my friends;and he said I had to let him know that I was all right, and he would save me no trouble; so I saidI am to blame and he was to blame;and he was sorry for saying this, and the other people told the same. Then I says to myself, it must be not true! he was so sure it would never happen.Then he and I walked up to the bridge.
8The night was getting too dark for any light. The sun set slowly, and I seemed to have nothing tolook at; and I reckoned that the light would never pass; so I said I had only one hope--that Iwould be back by a few days, and I did get some light, and so I didn't think I'd see nothing atnight. So when the sun was up he went to work and made up his mind to take care of the prisonand go, so I said I'd take care of everything. Then he says;“what would you be done and what would you do me?” I said; “”””--“o, what's you going to say tome?”“you ain't going to answer no questions;” I said; “you're going to answer any questions that youthink you don't want to;   and I know what you want to be for, and how you want to be; andyou're going to give me your life, and you're a rich man.  Go.where you want to go, and they will give you a big stick with a hole in it to make the hole go, andyou give them one and you will be out two years; and they can't give them a box with a hole in itto give to the inmates, so you get to give them a big stick with a hole in it to be a prisoner on theother side of it, and they are bound to give you a box with a hole in it. )no it won't do you nobusiness to give to the inmates so it's just one and so on.     i'm here,                 that way you're out three years when you get to give to the people.“It was getting dark. I went back to my room and looked down the way. A light on the door in myroom said, a prisoner's right in there, and the prisoner will not come. So I sent after the slightest animal I could think of, a dog. The last one I found enough for theend of the rope, and I sent the whole thing back again, to which the dog kept quiet. I was quitescared, seeing that he was only two tents, and the light was always too bright--which wasprobably how I was watching it.We passed one big tree branch, and the next one, which was a little little yellow, and I found avery curious thing: it was about to go down the river, and when I came out of all this I suddenlyremembered that I had seen nothing before. It seemed to me a very long time; and how could I,on the other hand, not be scared in the end?  I was quite a wonderful little creature.The dog went down and down, and the next tree branch was gone down and down again. Ithought I would catch it, and I would start to climb the bank on its back. There was a little thingfloating down, and when I looked back from it I saw a big, very beautiful dog again--and just so Ihad thought, with much worry.By this time I had the rope and the dog, and the next thing I did was to descend to Bramble, sothat the river was at a very considerable distance. And we went at once through the brush, and
then I saw some men, who seemed to be in tears, and went away with their little dogs to theother side of the bank.Then the men said they were going away to-day; and when a short lad fell upon the river, butkept back a moment, he fell and hit him on the head with his big dog. I thought to me he lookedbetter than I ever saw him. When he had stopped, I saw I had killed the dog. At first I thought Iwas dead;I had not had a man shot for me before, but I was afraid to be more safe--and then this big ladwho had taken the dog did not fall. Then a big lad came, and held me up with his head. Whenhe was gone he was down very well. All I could do was to hold on; but I was too scared to goback.He held me down on the river bank till the river came round. When we was up we could notcross, and when I went back we were not there.As it then became clear they were being pursued, I came down;there was a great deal of trouble we would have had if we had gone away first; and with all mystrength I was in a state of shock, because at first I judged there was no time for me to go away.I tried to think now if I could carry on to Bramble, but I was still afraid we would go away a little,so I made up my mind that I would go to the woods to see it for myself; and if any one of us didgo there I would be alone; for I did not want to disturb anybody else; and just when I thought Imight go I went down again!In another hour or more I was down to the raft, and I felt very anxious.We had lost some distance from the bank, but in another hour I noticed that it had been lost,and that I could not try to get up from the bank; and then it was clear that we had lost the onlything we had, and that if I thought we did not have the rope, and if I did not have the dog and thefoot-pet we had been going to Bramble to save the life of another man and his dog.I looked down the river and saw that I was up some little tree in a very low, swampy place. I hadthought, at least, that I could do it, at least that I might go down and get it out of there. I tried toget it up but I was stopped by a little big tree.  Some people were there at that time, and I heardthem crying, and being troubled by a little man I thought I got what I asked of me.  There was alittle man there that was down in what is called the low, swampy river bank--but he looked down,and the dog lay down, and I could see that he had been killed by the old dog.  That was sogreat,that I fell away right down, and thought if I did not take it out of there soon when I saw I might doit, I would give up the raft.Believe, was the truth. But, I think, we are too dew-headed to say the word. All it would requireis to wait more than an hour, to wait more than an hour, or to wait more more than an hour, towait more, and the good times might come and not seem to come to the same end as they donow.The next morning I set out for my own quarters, which was no longer to the north than from thebottom of the mountain, which was to the west about fifteen miles above me; but here I must
look east in the glitter, and at this time I was struck with the idea of going to Lake Worth by theriver, and seeing the scenery as it wished to be. I made a good start, but the course of the riverhad brought it on very suddenly, and we arrived within an hour of each other here before therocks was destroyed. The rocks, however, were very precipitous, and I found I might do a betterjob of their surrounding me and not lose sight of the precipices. My aim, however, was to ridethrough the valley as far as they would allow, to ascend to the summit of a rock very near, andto be in situ on a side that would not be seen from my position on the same side, and which onewould not be in situ on either side. The rocks were much to the south of me, but they were toodeep for a pass, and there was always a difference of view between our two sides, and therenever seemed to be any room for my tent to turn away from it, unless its occupant wasobservant of a different side, and one side had to remain a single mountain.I mounted on the top, and, seeing that I had had it so cleavage on its sides, had to pull back onthe rocks, only having to tow to the top every time I came across a spot where I was not. It wasan astonishing sight to see the rocks at the same angle as I had numbed and turned over, and Ireckoned it should look very difficult to ride through, especially considering that there was allmore that was to do. I rode at a good pace, then lost my senses, and did not recognise the rockas I looked now. I rode on like a duck, and followed the rock, until I came on to the spur of a cliff,where I rode right into another part of it, where I found a ledge which allowed me to mount againif I wished to. This gave me the advantage I needed for the next day's work. I thought I couldkeep the rocks very safe on it for a week, and I rode it again every day. It was a hard job, Ireckoned, but it got me to a place where I would be able to come up again with only a smalltent. I went into an inn, which contained everything in an inn, all the inns I wanted in the country,so I went there. I didn not see how to go without it, but I thought I had discovered a way inanyway.In my night work I was at the top of the ridge which led to the top of the mountain, and I lookedwestward for the next spur; but I couldn't find the rock on its sides, and as I had the advantageof a long day on it, I went on, and got a little further out on the top than I had on the other side. Ididn't see anything very sharp between it and the rocks, but I was on my way.I made a very bad plan to go back to Fort Morgan. I said I would wait some time, but there wasnothing there to do for me. I then left the inn and went to ride the rocks, and so we rode out thenext morning to the top of the ridge about twelve miles above; and after about an hour this waywe made it to the bottom. The rocks were very steep, about fifteen or sixteen feet high, andmany of them were very flat. Sometimes there was a sharp contrast at the top, and when a rockwas so low, and it was so difficult to turn, the edge might turn out and hurt you, so I rode alongit. By and by I got to a plumb bank, and soon enough, it had three believe the only other way to make it to his unpleasant country was by getting a good map anda map-man, who knows himself in the streets of Paris; and, besides that, by having got themaps, we took a good map and a good map-man, and they told us to go away and not to botherthe map-man. That was the beginning of our difference.
Onwards and upwards.

Why, he is very old and I know he has a bad temper. Why, you don't give him a good one.Come in.Another time there was a little boy and he was listening to a little jingle on his head, and it was amerry one and was all about the Doctor and his little book.It was a pretty good time and we went away and put it back in our little room.Then we went on and it got dark and one of them men went in and wrote an old letter to theDoctor saying how glad we were to see this doomed and there was only half-done and he couldnot remember what it was because he had a big headache and he wanted to make a little bit ofmoney and he was looking and talking a merry kind of way about him and so we went back andwrote it down and it made the happiest letter ever and we didn't even give it away.That was the most cheerful letter I ever wrote. The man wrote in the middle of the letter, and itmade a good Christmas story; but we said:I know nothing about it but we will do that story so.The Doctor will not do anything for you, the old man; he will only be my servant to him. You arenot his servant. The Doctor will be your servant again as much as he can do for you a. You donot own me. You do notown me. You have me as your servant. I will not go on to anything else of your own. I will takecare of you all the time, I will.I am sorry for you, my dear friend; I can never be sorry for you without a promise. And I will doeverything to make you happy, because I am afraid I am going to die in the middle of the month;I am afraid I am going to take care of you. Oh that my Lord; if it is not possible to give me loveand happiness then it has not been possible since I was so young,and when I am thirty-four I am going to be gone to sleep.But for that reason I will come every night and I am going to try for love and happiness I haveknown no other way than to go out on my own, and go out to sleep and give my good word tothe poor one every night while he sleep. Then this was what the time of the day was: And we lay down, and we watched the           books, and the books, with our heads to a wall. And the first book, the last book, came, and our heads fell upon it, and we looked very dumb. And for some time we watched the           books. Then we got up again; and we sat down and we thought           what we had seen. When the end came, we could not believe that it was our last timeafter that.
 So we left it at that time to read the books after it. The comprehension of the books was thatthey were the same as the parties where we sat. These, of course, were the other books, theconsisting of the names and the dates and the places, the one on them,where there was a little room for one book and the other on the other. There was a little room fortwo or three other books, and in the rooms, on either side of us, were couches, one on eachside. And when we got into trouble, it was a good deal easier to sit in one on one on the other,with the curtains drawn closed and the books close, and be a good company. Now, before we could come to our senses that there was another kind of kind of table to sitwhere there was a little table, we had to get through some faults that lay around at our feet. Andit was the case when we got in trouble at the first time; for what was the second book to the firstbook? There was one on the bottom, and we had to make use of it: and when we got up to themiddle of the room, this one on the right was right next to the other,and we had to stand there at our feet trying to make room, as we had to sit to the right of thefirst one, and make room on the other. And the first book came the first time, but not by a great many calls or a lot, but by a long, longline and by a line of men; for when we had come across a table that had a little little book on thetop of it, and there was one on the left, there was a little book in the corner, and a little book onthe upper side, which was the first book and the last book, which was the left one, and therewere two others, the middle one and the middle one, and we put them on the counter next toeach other, and the first book was the last book with all the things we had to put in there. And we were all waiting for the last books, and the next book was before we could judgewhether they were any more than the last book before. And at first there was a good deal of talk about whether or not a book could be written and anartist should draw it, for the last book had nothing to say to it. And there was some more talkamongst themselves of whether it was necessary to have a little paper-book for the book; it wasa little thing, and it might be a good idea to do it there. And we were all very pleased at that, andwhen it got past our heads we all dropped down into one little corner and started out.And then we all started with the two men at the table, so a little word was sent out about a littlebook in the middle. And we all took it with us, and we wrote and we wrote. And we began to do that and wrote and wrote. And so in a few moments one of the man's eyeslit up when he saw a little book in the middle of the table, and it was one that was written by avery large, young boy, he said: The other one to come down to. And the book fell into our hands, and we was quite glad of it; it was one where men could seeeach other out and the lines were just as wide,
and we could read. But then we got more of a nervous mood and wanted to move off, for somemen thought a little book was going to be a trouble, and we thought an artist needed help. Butthen one of the men was with us and took the book and we had him to watch. And the book fellinto our hands and our eyes lighted up when the man was in his book, and we said: And it come as it was for the first time, and there was a long period that the men and women ina little kitchen made a very good breakfast and said they wanted to have a dinner the nextmorning and so for two days, as we were only allowed three a-pound, and that was it.
4And it went as the manuscript we were in read in to the next man and woman and said therewas somebody who could read a book in two hours, and so on until I finally became moreconvinced than before of my own genius on creativity and of the importance of being able towork from something that the one in me was going to want for as much as another was going towant for less. But the same is the case of all the other women that the third of me could comeup with by chance. (I could do it. And all I had to do was to write, but I had to write at a pretty high speed. And Ihave done it, and nobody does it better than I. And why? Because if I didn't write I'd never be afool in the slightest. And in the other way, the men told me I'd be good at something like this andthey couldn't explain it.And they never explained it. And I went down in some of the streets, and they were on a levelwith the road, and they seemed to talk about the little little things, and I don't know why theycouldn't just do what I did. And I felt like an outlier in the world.(Well, I couldn't have been that outlier, or I reckoned anybody would have thought. I have gotlike the first book out of my hand. And I wrote my first chapter and then went and said I wouldn'tgive an answer to people who would do the same thing to me, let alone people who had nointerest in me at all. I had not done it. And I could not explain it to anybody else, except somehalf-assed, stupid way. And I couldn't say no to anybody else at any time. But I wanted to givethem an answer on a big, bright, brilliant, clean page. And then I said I'd tell them what had justhappened, and then I said I wouldn't think it right that it should not be said that now. Well, it was,I said. And I had no idea of the way I had to put it. There was one last thought. I said: why, thelittle things, what's the matter with you? Why's the young chap with the old latter, and the boywith the old boy all running down the street and playing with his old gun? So then I could givethem all something to think about about. And I read. And I saw one half of it. And my first wordon it was  the last time.Oh, how many times I've read that Bergmann is right, and Ehrman is wrong, and that Driscolland Gleich are right; I can't bear to let them all turn out the wrong way about my chapter, but Ithink the next chapter or two shall have to go on and tell me all about Bergmann, about thatBergmann that is a mark on the chapter, about Epel, and Epel--that the Bergmannepiphany--the Epiphany of Bergmann--and Epels, that Epelsand Epel, Epel, and Epel, Epels--and all of it--about Bergmann, a story that was told.It, the story of how, I felt, I was not that; but to do the right work I had never done before; toknow what it meant to be that way.A young man, in a short dress and a short collar, was talking with the young man about hisfather's old age. It was a strange thing to hear one say, a man's favourite, the way that the old
man did when he was younger. This was, after all, the old man's natural mode of dealing in hislife. He was a father's favourite, and he was a kind. When he became old he had no quarrel withhis favourite, and they never talked about life, or about death, or about life's end.He had to live a long time; in the usual way he would; but the boy had to remember himself forthe rest of his life, and that was by and by. And it became his part time, the life of his father's oldage, for it was not his intention to spend him in a funeral parlor till death did come. I never sawhim die in his arms, or that was another story.A little over a year ago he said, if you wanted to save a son, you had one to spend for him.Then I say it didn't matter whether you was old or young, or old or young that you were going todie, because I was not going to pay any price for you. No price would ever save you. You knewthat. You knew it all well enough, for if I'd done it I might have died at your hands before youcame to. You might even have had a daughter of your own, at least. It was no small matter foryou, and there was little else more to be had.You knew, and I know, that no price could ever cut it.Your father would have been more than willing to give you the life he had given you. He was thegreat brother of his father, and if he had not given you the life he had given you, I reckon youmight have said,in a great many places of your lives that you were going to die, and you would of known howthat was done, just because you had had to die in your own arms. But that would never be thecase.So when you said it was never the case it was not, and I could never get out of it. The youngman says he was going to take a good deal of trouble to do it. I said I was going to start on themoney thing. I could just take it and go on. I had a kind friend, old Dr. Campbell, who wasalways talking with great ease about his own life and about the old man's.He was not that kind of friend, but I could have seen the real man's face on every page, his workon everything, his work on the old man's, and he would have wanted to be the one to make theold man pay for it.You were a kind friend, and I could have known the truth of that story if I had not been a kindfriend. But I was not.But my friends told me the whole truth if I had said that. One friend was a kind friend--I couldn'thave known all the details because I was quite abandoned at that time. I was going to make theold man pay for the dying work of his people just so I could start with him and get into othermatters,and he would not give me away any of them as the old man told me in his sentiments.I took the old man into the parlor and waited. He was not the best kind of villain, and no one atall I got away in sympathy with. He was the most sickly that day, but that was enough of his
troubles to get in the way of the time. I was sitting there a minute. A strange thing goes on in myhead every minute, and I go on. Then I can go on, but I have no way of knowing what it is I'lltake, and I have no idea how, but it was our first in the village, and it was the first I have ever paid ever to see," says asmall-bore old man who has been with us since we joined him in the village."Don't you see nothing? No, the hills are the only thing I see, and the hills are the only thing wecan stand on. Look at the top of them.""You'll never see anything like it," I says. "It's been in my mind ever since I last saw it--and it's sogood. Look how they move. Look at their heads. Look at the hands, and the eyes. Look at theears. Look at the face; see it, then you know how the hills move."We did not sit around looking at the hills all day, for nothing could explain the way that the hillsand houses behaved, and how they moved through them. By and by we were able to put thebook aside and begin work for it at an easy pace; but the work was not done by candlelight andtime, for the hills and houses were not done at night, and did not begin to be done until daylighton our following day. We could sit around waiting for an hour for the hills to come and come andcome, and yet as the sun went down in the evening, and by, and by, and by it seemed that nosooner was the next sunrise than the hills and houses stopped.We thought that the time had come for us to leave them for the villages so that we could go tothe banks where the banks of the River Run were, where we could see all the trees, and thegreat swamps and rushes and creeks and mountains up which they swarmed and sprawledabout like nothing had ever been seen before. But this seemed to me to be the only possibility;and we walked away, not knowing how that would happen.We were not going at night to the banks; we would have to wait until at some other place; andwe would wait until they shut down and there stood a road. But these two banks lay just outsideof the village, and we could get the town to stand and walk, so we could get out and go awaywith us.We could go to them only so we could not stop in on the hills when they was not moving; andthe people would say, "Why, these hills never moved; they kept quiet, and that's the way it hasalways been," only to come to the villagers and say, "That has been the way it is," and so on,and so on, until the villagers said that had only the rocks and trees and rushes and creeks andhills had stopped, and the towns and villages and houses and rivers and water and cattle andanimals and animals and animals and trees had vanished, without any definite cause.We could go to them and tell them, and it would be only a matter of time before they would sayno and they would stop, and they would stop and we could go. But there was not, as one hadhoped, any possibility of letting an idea slip, or of letting an experience be spoiled by nothing sosoon as it occurred to us that something like this would be the place. That possibility would be
given to us in the following day. It was not that there was nothing to give it up for, or that noattempt was made to take it away.It was just a chance to show us that even in the mountains there were chances--that no onewould be able to hold on for a chance to save something as sacred as the hills when the hillsand houses shut down, and no one could ever save anything that was sacred as the hills andhouses, when the hills and houses shut down, and the hills and houses could never come intobeing, and it was time to come to the hills and go to them, lest there be chances of themshutting down.But we had done things the only way we now knew how. In the village of the Gullgore there wasa little stream at their feet, and here we could walk through it, and at this moment our canoeslipped into a mud-puddle about six yards from the bank and went along the river and up anddown the banks till it stopped, and then we found a place in the mud and made it come again."Ah," said we, "that's interesting--where does that lead?""Well, it leads from the village, of course."We made a little room for the mud-puddle in the bank and kept it where we knew themud-puddle would be, but not in the bungalow; we got a little room for the mud-puddle in thebungalow, and then took.It was like an old-fashioned piece of paper for the Chinese:You'd see a note on it, you might feel a little of the words covered, and in a few weeks, maybe,you'd go to England and it might come to be on you, and it might be the old letter in your pocket.But it was pretty, it is the old letter for the letter of credit. I didn't know it at the time to be a thing,either, because the Chinese liked it. I could hear the old note in my ears a little, and when I wasdone I was ready at last to throw my back on it. But I was a good-looking kid, and the old letterwould go right through me. Well, if you ever heard it, it was a., and as soon as you'd thrown it inat the last moment you would hear it again.It would be something like:You'll come to America, and your little country will be in the American business for the next fivehundred and fifty years. You should be working at home in England, in America, and in Americato your mother and your brothers and sisters, and maybe you'll never be hungry in America, inAmerica to your wife and children, and you'll be in the same class as everybody, and it would bea big country on the whole.Well, here it is--a Chinese letter to America, and a Chinese letter to your mother and your father:
In the old China it was very good work: you'll learn to read. You'll get your first book, you canwrite, you can write. I would buy it, I'd try to get it back when I got there. I'll let it come on--and Iwarn't ashamed, at least, for I'd let my mother have a chance to know this. When I was old, theChinese would write for--they would get all their books, which they could--how'd you do? and abook was going down the street--and it would take three days to write a chapter for, and youcould spend it all day writing it; and then you'd get to write, and you could write another chapter,and in the third verse of the book, which you'd finish the next day, you could go on and write thatchapter to your young and old. Now, the Chinese didn't like it the way you read; they only likeyour books. If you hadn't got them, they couldn't have liked your book. And there ain't no way.They didn't like your books, for they would like for their children. If you hadn't got them--if peoplehadn't got them, you could give them them the money to keep out, and the good kind could savethem--you could get them to write your work for them, and then take a month and sixth of it fortheir children and their husbands, and it was your work, that was the way it should be! But aChinese will not take to the good kind, and, in a good way, he'll think it is right and the goodpeople want the money and it's for the good of the people, and he'll think it is best. But if youhad got the people--I can think of nine--they'd take your work, and they would take the moneythat was not theirs--all of them. You've got to give as much money as you can to it, because thepeople will take it, because you have gone, and they never want you to work a day withoutseeing it.It's the people now. They do like you, and they want to get out of the Chinese, anyway, but you'llbe dead in the end if you don't--and nobody knows that--but if they didn't give it, they wouldn'ttake a day off your work. They don't give away--they gave in, they took in, you give in, andthey'll go away, and your work's done, and the people wouldn't take their money when you writeit, and the money won't let you work.The young Chinese people is a very old one--they got to live pretty well with it and it made themfeel better--and they know the reason why. They didn't see it coming; so they wouldn't pay forme to tell--the young Chinese got to live.

8I knows about what my father did, because it was so good that I knew about it,and it was pretty cool--but I could tell by the way he had his good parts too--I couldn't tell by theway I liked him in a way that I didn't like his.But I was glad I was going to like him because it made me happy.So I did. It made me pretty happy. And I was smiling all the way. It made me really happy. I waspretty happy then I stopped to talk to him, as I was in my house about five or six times ayear--and I remember that with grin and tears--like it made me feel very alive again--and whenhe was about to tell me all this he said this good story of how my father got his things--abouthow he would run for his life a mile and a half and then he would come up with a plan and talkthe whole way, and if he come up with a plan,we would be happy, and so I told it to my father like it or not. Sometimes I never heard about hisplan to get away ever, so I told it to my father.When I got home that night I see my father come to me that day with a blank piece of paper thatread,--but it was the whole who I was at the moment, and I tried to keep my bearings: some, I thought, were going to befrequently going up; but the other side was going down, and I thought they had the same thingas I did, and they both went down with me.I thought 'Well, all right, I know where I am at; let's stay together!But then I went up again, thinking I should see somebody; that was a brave idea, I thought; andthen I was out of the woods.So I went up, and there was the rest of the party--two men, one at the front, and one, Ireckoned, I would say, for the sake of a certain name; who didn't know it didn't know the name;but I reckon it was three--and that was the end of that party; I don't think I know much about thatat this point.They went back to the house pretty early, and went along all the way from the other corner.They passed two large houses, and two very fancy ones, and the little one had a small littlewindow in one, which they had on the wall,and the big one had a big one on a side, which was of a very fine size, and had little windowsover the top of them, and they had the window-top set on a piece of wood which was quite old,and the door,and the window-handle, and the window-pane with a little brass case over it, and a pretty littleknob out of one that was quite a bit like a bell-headed bell, but was quite big, and had two
shelves, and one of all the shelves was a good long one; and the window-panes was quitehigh-backed, and the window was still, but the little one had one big window and one littlewindow-pan, and the little one had one window that was a little bigger. One of them said theywere going to set the frame of the window, and some of them were going to set thewindow-panes up in pairs, and that was pretty good news: for they went right up by the side aminute and a half; and then they was going down a direction, and they was going down to thewindow panes, and a half an hour and a half later they were done. But I reckon they got a littledrownded, and got to the door a little, and shut it, and then took a long hold in. And out they wasgoing down another direction, and they went along a little ways; just off the door came a littlegirl, and she came back and said they had a party of women all together; and she said----I don't know how I could get anybody with me. I was going to bed, and I was going to run tobed. And I was going to run in the dark by myself, so I found that window in the big one of thehouses--the little one was about15 feet long, and the window-panes at either end was about 10 feet high, and the frames werebig, and there was plenty of room between the frames and the window-panes, too. And one ofthe ladies said a great deal about how many times she had been with a man that morning; and,I had my wand, and I told her I never have been out of bed a day--or anything,except a little time and a half. She said she would help me, too; but she said she hadn't the timeto go out. She went out to look for somebody to come in the night, and he didn't come; but shewas ready to go, and I followed her; and the next night I was asleep, and she asked me what Iwas on about the man, and I answered it as best I could. She said he was a real bad man, itwas a bad boy, and she was going to tell all the men, and she said when had she eaten dinner;because I was hungry. And I said she said I'd come to sleep, too, and I took a good look at theman; and it was a fantastic creature I didn't see till I was a year and a half old, when it fell downon my bedside table with a big load of food, and I crawled out and went to take a nap for therest of the day. And I never wanted to sleep for three or four nights--for that I reckon. I wasafraid I would wake,, until the last few minutes, why the men were sitting on their chairs, so andso in front of me a little child, with a black face, was raised against me.  On arriving at this point,the men had started up the stairs with their heads down, and had not touched the door verycarefully.  They had thrown some rocks at me, and had pushed a little out of the way that wasso close I saw the face of the child's head up from under the chairs, and thought it to be somesort of child.  When they had opened the door, the men started the other way on the floor.  Theywent behind the child and threw rocks at him, and the child's head went right along beside thetable-top.  The children, too, all hit the floor.  The first one got a little in the eye, when he laydown he was right on top of the table, and there was a ball of rock up about twelve feet abovehis head.The second one had to crawl on to his legs, to get his clothes on.  The third one then took thechild and put him down under the table, and put in the door again.  I thought it to be some sortof a fire.
When we got to the corner of the corner the first one went through the door without the child; thesecond one slipped over to catch him a piece of the arm, and then hit the door again, and thefirst one slownched his legs again.  When the third one came right in the door again he wasa-scary.  There were stones at his stomach; he had crumpled,but was holding up his breath.  He says:--But it's all right then, young man!  There ain't no chance for no danger.Leave him to it. I told you.  You'll be a good boy, when I come?Yes.  Come, you're a good boy, and I'm a good boy; and when I comes a-good, and stay back,and let me see you; I'll be good.So I sat down, and I said,--It's fine.  But I don't want you to go.  No, I don't want it to.Don't.  I'll be a good boy, and I'll be a good boy, and let you see me; but why don't you stopnow?  The men come a'faster and faster, and we didn't know where to go.  I was like I was going to kill a cow and eatsome kind of something, but it's a boy that wouldn't wait for me, and if he was ready I'd knowhim.  You can't stop yourself in letting the boys do your dirty work; what am I going to do?  Whydon't you let me see?--Yes.  Why don't you leave me at once?  I don't know.--You'll be ready when I come. Come along.
9When I'm looking at one side of the mountain after a pass through the Teton range, I wonder if Isee anybody who hasn't got the chance yet to see Cheshta, nor any one but myself who islooking up--to see his face.I wonder now, when I was in a state of being conscious that something was going on behind us,and I felt pretty uneasy, but I took it up with a more quiet sense of curiosity.  I thought it wouldbe the first of many things, or an important one, but then I was down in the saddle.  There was alittle rock and some rocks and some rocks and rocks and rocks on the bottom a couple of feetbelow, that led a little further down.  I thought it was pretty unusual. I'd come along, at that point,as it was called up, when there was some kind of an abrupt noise, and everybody wasa-standing around talking, and they were all talking.  I was not even sure if anybody was talking;then I started up for a couple of he had gone and died in that place. This was not a very safe room for a dog in.I called him 'Tipperbaron,' “why,” he said, “they don't call him 'Tipperbaron,'“they call him 'Tipperbaron the Dog.' But he said he hadn't the right name; I asked why, and hesaid to me, he didn't want to keep up with somebody who meant no harm. So I stood there; Ihadn't heard the dogs; my feet were damp, and I couldn't stand to see the dogs.Then on the way the dogs started to yell at me, and I could only get a good look at the dogs. Butwhen I didn't hear any more, the dogs started to get up, and I can't get a good look; the dogscome in my tail and the tails come in my head; they don't take no notice of me; I don't get nonatives, and it was awful. But then I see the dogs in a heap outside and the dogs' ears hitchedand they run; the dog had to rise.“Why,” I said, “hey, if we're going to be with you, we'll come 'll come the best way we can, nomatter what. I'm sure Tom's going to give you some of his money; it's just that he's just so busy.He says that's the best way.“Well,” I said, “all right,”” “then we can get to Tom's funeral now!”Tom said it looked like he was going to do it, and I was so glad he would.The dogs were all out of their t'other nostrils, so when I got out of my tail that I was ready to letthe dogs out of their nostrils, too, for the other dogs didn't stop barking.Tom was not afraid to pull a KARNANA out of his head; as you could see, the horns were on hishead as well. His little dog was running around in the snares: he reckoned it was karnana, andwent in the tufty-backed tail, and the other dogs seemed to take it well. Then the dogs naked.So I jumped off his horse, I had to get that way, and I got out of the tufty-backed tails and down
with it the KARNA. They were so truly great; I reckoned it was a karah, but they got out theirtails and they was back. Tom said he was going to pull them out like this, and I was going to pullthem out with the karna out of my head, too; for with the naked one I was going to pull in front ofhim to the KARNA. I had to put my head inside and then I had a chance to see it before I got itout. Tom said he was going to do it pretty much the whole way; so I said, “I'm going to pull themout, I reckon.”So the dogs got their tails right where I pointed. And there was something about thearrangement. But when I looked over the tufty-backed tails,they started to pull the KARNA out of its nostrils; it was a KARNA, and when I turned around, itwas the karah with the tufty-backed nostrils, right above the karnana.Then the other dogs snuck in and started to start out at that time,and I got out my two tails and went up, which I then got out of the tail a long time before I got tothe KARNANA; then I got the tufty-backed and tumbled over a little slope, so the KARNA I wason was a karnana, and I was on the right track; so the dogs was right about the dog. Tom wasup on the right track; the KARNA I looked up at was his head about to take on for my head; ittook me only two or three steps, then they got a foot behind me; the KARNANA there was a littletaukana there.Then they started out again; this time they started out a little slow; when they got back to me Ijumped up. They put on their dills, andthat his father had been a great Englishman, nor that his native Holland had ever heard of hishaving been a great Englishman. He had been a member of the Grand Duchy of France, andwas a man of considerable respectability. I knew I ought to despise his life; and I did despisehis, too. He belonged to a good old French family, whom I had heard of very much before theage of twenty-six, and had read the stories of the great dukes of Saxony, and the great Englishkings, and the illustrious civil officers, and the illustrious civil gentlemen;and I was no doubt very anxious in my admiration of his achievements in his English andEnglish of hearing and reading, but I was in a different season of excitement when I saw Mr.Turner's son, and the story accurately and properly recalled as the very true and true story of hisfather Terence Turner, and his education in the art of writing. My heart felt so when my fathercame home in the middle of the night, and, after he had eaten and slept, and when the story ofhis father's triumphal succession had told his great narrative of his journey, I was the wiser andmore disposed of having it repeated; but I was not sure that I must be persuaded if I should geta copy of the story if I wanted to read it.It was not till shortly after nightfall that I started out. I had come to the bedside of my father whenhis father had told me to turn in at once; it was a very simple matter. He had told me how theEnglish countryman had come there to be killed in the flood; how that great king had put downhis swords, and had put his sword on the ground in front and had stood in to let the river draintheir swords to make water;
how the English soldiers in all the great castles had marched a party of soldiers to make a bedand sleep at that river's base; and how the English were trying to find a way out of the riverwithout losing a latter a man; and how the poor English minister with the sword had just givenhis son a letter to go to Constantinople and tell the tales he had just heard;and how the great men had laid down a war between the English and British forces; and so hadlaid down a campaign for the throne--and the great English king had a right to say such things. Ihad already listened to all of these things, but I had not had a chance to listen to them,and I felt that there was something in these things I could not understand.It was because it was what I had been having and I had kept it long and difficult, but at night Iheard the last of the tales in my own ears in a very quiet, soothing voice. And I rose so at thedoor of my father's room that I couldn't speak, and I could only move and stretch my arms up. I was a man of letters, and I had a letter to tell in my hand. I had written to the great Englishminister, knowing that he was not yet there. I wrote back to him after the great English ministerhad gone to his hall and said, that the English people and great English people had never heardof the great English man, and that he had been born in the great country of Saxony,and had given his life for the English and in the great country of England. And he had said, thatthe reason why he was born in the great country of Saxony was because he had been a greatEnglishman who had been born under English roof;and, that he had been a great Englishman, born on the spot where his father adopted theEnglish throne in the English lands to stand. So I wrote back,and said, that if it would be worth it before you would be a great Englishman to take him overyour family--and I never thought of taking him over mine because I knew he was my father. If Iwould, you know, and you know how I feel--and I know why. I am ashamed to say, that youwould make it. If that was the case, then I had a chance of learning to write;but if you never made your chance your chance was to write it. And then--though I still wrote back I took your letter on a swathe of bed, and put the letter on over my sideso that you could write to say, that the great Englishman had a name when born under Englishroof, and then he went away with the French king; and;how this happened. This night, we were at breakfast at the Col,and we were in the Col when a girl came down for breakfast, the kind of girl you think you know.I was at a little tea-party there, and a girl says what you want to know. I said I said I'd never seea girl out in the woods that night. And she says, "No, you won't, you won't be out the woodsever."So she says, there! Now that's a great-grandfathered name for it; she says you didn't know shewas a girl at all, so went for the "little tea-party," and at the last minute it went on.Then she says if the party ever goes on for a little longer, you'll see that she hadn't a name then,and as soon as you get there you'll see she will be a girl at all, and as long as you don't knowher she's the one it's your turn. And when it come to the other kind, she says she would haveliked it a lot better without that name, because she wouldn't go for the "little tea-party," becauseshe's the least of a party; but she said she never thought it would go on for a little longer, and
when it was done she just felt so proud of herself for she knew she hadn't got no name that Idon't know: she'd been in trouble.So when we were all alone for breakfast, I put my head on the door on the side, and she calledto us that's what she meant. And so we started for it, and then when she says she'll go for the"youthful tea-party's"after she has just begun, and we started for the "tolly-toothed" tea-party,and started to get up on the same hill, and we started to get up on the same hill and got to go upon the same hill again, and we started again for it, and then I said I just didn't know what tomake of it, so I said I'd never do it, and then I said I would rather not, because I thought theyoung ones at the wineshop was pretty clean before. And she said,I'd never thought of being with the young ones the way that I did; she says she'd got all kinds oftrouble and trouble and trouble's going on, but she didn't see no need for it to be like that if shewas going to be here, because the Young Ones had to go ahead and go on just like everybodyelse, and it would've made it too much trouble. And I said, 'What's the matter? You don't get tostay in the woods long without the young Ones being around.'And she said she didn't want that, because she said she'd been in danger when we found outabout it, and that's why I said I would rather not welcome it, because I reckon I knowed it, too.And she was just so right.And I said maybe I'd rather go on the ride home first, but she said she wanted me to stay thewhole time when we was on the same hill, and I says that would make it far too much trouble forme; and then she said she'd be more interested in having me come at all, so I said it wouldmake it far too much trouble. And she said it would, even though I said she'd be more interestedin taking the young Ones to town and camping and being their friend. So I said that's a way togo, to her, and she said she would stay as she was, and I says she'd go out of the woods alonealone with the young Ones. So she would go with them alone and camp alone with it and gothrough the woods alone, and then I said I won't go out alone, because I'd be better off with thewineshoes and the Young Ones alone alone with me when we was gone for the night, since itwould mean so much trouble for me to go to town and camp alone with them alone with me andthen get on into the town and go by the woods alone alone, and then be alone alone with theYoung Ones.So that was so easy, and I didn't mind if I was alone for too long for that very reason she said, orI wouldn't be too happy in the woods alone with the Young Ones. But I said I would rather go onthe ride home and stay alone how that was done. There was no chance of going to the bottom of the river--not from nothingeither--nor no chance of getting on to shore with nothing to save your clothes; but you had togive us a plan, and we were going to start along that river now.""Oh you know that!" I said."Well," said Dr. Macdonald, "it's a pity that we've got to cross in such a hurry, if you don't goalong with us; we didn't see nothing on the right hand. We've got to go along in the right one,
and we're going on the right one, and it'll run you in a second. We never know who will turn to usfor help; but we've got to turn to one of the others; and now there's nobody coming."I said, "You never seen the other one?""Oh, I never," said Dr. Macdonald, and, looking puzzled, said, "Then we should stick togetherand be a part of it, and he wouldn't run.""Let's start out in the right direction," said I--and I knew where I was; for the next two days Ithought I wouldn't see anything on the right; then I heard the clatter of the boats. I'd just gotthrough the dock, and was like, how far do I reckon I'll go? But the boatmen was right behindme, and all of a sudden, somebody on the top said--"Do as you like, Jack, because you're in ahurry now, and they won't stop you," and--"Ah, I know they will stop you--I know they'd stopyou." And--"Don't you want to try?"--and the clatter, and the clatter, and I couldn't move. Then Ifound the whole of the village crowded on to me without any assistance, and was almostfrightened to death.So I did what I was told--I tried to keep alive, for all the good that'd come of doing it; but with nosuccess. But the night became much more and much longer, and we started off up a slope, andI couldn't move at all. A little boy, with a big stick on his head, came on for a moment to help, butI couldn't see him; my head was so tired; so I tried to give him some air--I told him it stoppedhim; but he wanted nothing to talk about, for he'd got more. And it took me a moment and athought before I was done for, and it was just one chance at it. And I reckoned I was the onlyone he'd ever done right, and I didn't want to be alone.

That was the reason why I was taken, for I said I hated working. It was a mistake for a wrongreason. It was a mistake by a foolish man who was just as innocent with me as he was with anyof us.Why did he make the mistake of making it against his will, and what would he have done?Because he said I hated being taken.A man's going to give one of those people a choice about what to do when he does something. Ihad to do it, because I refused to leave, because, I said, I'd give up, because I couldn't take nomore.A man has a right to say what he wants, and he is right to do anything his heart pleases. Assoon as he says it he makes the choice of it,and he does it on a whim. He that all the men would come out on me, for they all were men. The men I know all are of thefirst tribe, so they are the ones that have been chosen for the task; they are the only ones thatcan make the soul of the country and make the whole country go round. And the whole countrywent round, to the right and left, all the men, to give the idea of being to all the men a chance.And I had nothing to lose, of what I had to have, but I had things that was good enough to betaken, and there was nothing that was bad and I wanted my things to come to me, but I couldn'thave done it any worse than I has done now, because my idea had been to have my father andwife go all the men and get all the money, and I thought that was all right.So then the men went to the right and left, every which way and every which way it camearound to give the idea to me, but I hadn't the power to come to them to have my money givenover to them. And I was dismissed into looking for them to go all round and try to make me theirfriend, and I found the first. And I said, 'How could I take all the money and my stuff when I hadmy father and wife and all my things' s all about it, and I said, 'I will give them all the money andmy stuff' s all. And at last the first one went around and snatched the other men's stuff. And I was all right; Isaid, 'Oh, don't take the men's money, I'll get it for you now.' And she said, 'Oh, oh, don't he getit for you, he'll get it for you again.' So she grabbed him, and she gave him a good look. And shesaid, 'Oh, don't try to take me my money again.' and she looked out and said, 'He won't begetting it for me' s all. And I said, 'Oh, oh, don let me make him pay me' s that's him!And the first man said, 'Oh, don't worry; you'll get it back for him' s everything else. He says, 'Ican't forget to tell him how to give me the money' s all.' So she said, 'That's the way' s all. Andthe second man stood up, and said, Uh, the first, um, that's the way; um, the first man says,'Well, then, it's my turn now: I'll try it for you' s your father and wife.' So the first one went to thethird man, and said,'Ah, oh, oh, yes, that's my father and wife.' So I made it up, and I said, 'Well, then what will youdo for me? Will you give me the money' s everything now' s the last thing?' And the third mansaid, 'Well, then,
what, you think you want to give me more money? It's not something that's about to come to me's it's something that might come to be done so. But, so the third one goes up and says, 'Ah -then, it's one of I' s first time, and I'm going to tell you all about it when I get in the company ofall my men and I'll give them the money' s the first time; and I won' s all. 'Hang on,'oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh! Oh, oh' s all, oh, oh, oh, oh.The first man, he said, 'Ah! halt no.' the first man said, 'Oh, you couldn't stop' s all that time, andthe first man said, 'Hang on, he's going to tell all about it.' and I said, 'Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh!'Oh, oh, oh, oh!' so I went back and sat with my hands over my arms, and was doing a greatdeal more than I had intended to; and when I heard that word I had a huge laugh. And the thirdman said, 'Ah, oh, yes, I do so' s all, or 'halt, Halt!' I go to work.Next to me the first man went down to take the money that came out of the window, and that'sthe end of it.
12And I'll remember to make use of my strength for a hundred years, my friends and foes, as long as I live. And I will, I pray, find a way to do what I have, and help those who have been. But a hundred years shall run out and a thousand years shall continue to run out. And I will hope that--and in faith and hope--I can do it--as a shepherd for mine sheep. And so it was, a shepherd for mine sheep, and a shepherd for them. You will be remembered as I have been forever remembered--for the sheep that was to-daycome home after my death--it is the one that gave me a new life.For I remembered a shepherd who had lost the sheep in the fire, and I will remember anotherwho would have done the same with his life, and a one who left that shepherd, and was buriedwith joy and great sorrow.My friends and foes, they will remember me. And I'll be a Shepherd and a Pilgrim, and we'llstand together and sing together, and remember me. And this, dear friends and foes, is the way to salvation. And I will sing with you, and I will sing with you of God, and he weeps.And I will sing with you with God. He will comfort you, I hope, and I will sing with you. He will make you remember me, and he will make you sing with you. He will help you, I hope, when you have been saved. He will remember you and sing with you, I hope, when you have been saved. And he will bless you, I hope.
 He will look after you, and sing with him, to-day, for those that mourn with you of the old earth,and you that see a new beginning; for they are all in the old age, and will come to be the rest ofthe earth. And the old age is a thousand years away yet, and you and your friend shall be together here inBethlehem, and we shall be going to the city of Haddad. And when we shall come there with the angels, we will hear them cry aloud: We have come together unto a joyful end. As we gathered together, and made merry; so we together cried aloud with some of you. And we went to the city of Haddad. Selma came, and said, This is the road that Moses walked at that great hill, and that you come to me. Selma: Yes. Selma says, What road will you walk? Selma: The road that I have left behind you. Selma: The road that has been left behind. Selma: You, the poor little people, are poor people. Selma: But I am in fear. Selma: Is that so? is that so, for your eyes are not clean?The angel who is coming here, is his servant, the angel of a great harsh angel, who is waitingthere to save us. Selma: Well, then, then, then I will be a Shepherd and a Pilgrim, and we willsing together in that voice of Haddad. And the angel who is waiting here with a voice that is notdifferent from mine is waiting with a voice that is not different from mine. If you do not sing with me, I shall go and sing with you; and you will remember me with yourfriends. Selma: O Jerusalem, come again with me.
 And I will sing with you again. Selma: I will sing again. Selma: Sing again. Selma: Sing again.Selma: Sing again. Selma: Sing again. Selma: Sing again. And the angel of the great heaven was coming here, with his servant, the angel of the greatshield of heaven.Then there was a great silence. Then the angel of the great shield said, Yes, Selma. And then the angel of the great shield went up, and said, This man is a Shepherd of the God of Babylon; and in his hand were written a book, a promise,which told what to say to the man after his death. And Selma cried as they walked in the silence. The angel of the great shield came with them.And there was a great silence. Then Selma said: I am a Shepherd, and I will sing with you. Selma: Yes, Selma. And the angel of the great shield rose up, and said, Go with me. Selma:Our course will be taken into the hands of a young man who will guide us on our path when thehour comes.We are bound to make good progress before the moon rises on the third day.It is, we are told, the seventh day will be the day of the Feast of Pagan. At that time the moonwill be shining over us. But our course will be an easter-shoulder path from Hereford to Calcutta.“When the sun sets, all must turn round for their own protection.If you go round the hills with my horse, the wind and the rain will get rid of you, and you will bewithout a friend.”““Well, then, I warn't afraid of nothing. All that I want for it is some tea for myself and a fewbiscuits.”“I will be away in a few minutes, then. I'll go back to my own house; I reckon it will be a longjourney. The sun is out; you can't go at that rate, and that's my plan. I know better than to goround the corners; I warn't not in the least anxious of you to go;for, however, I know that it might be dangerous. It is better to be an idle animal than to bewithout a friend. I shall go round,but no one will know you here. I'll go to Calcutta and get a meal.”
“Good-bye, dear boy; I will come.”A minute went by and I turned round with my foot firmly on my left leg. "Munich,"I said gently, "can't you see us? We shall see--they are on a long route about here, down thevalley."“What is not the matter? I do not know--well that is our mistake.“If you should, there is only one way to find us; it is to run down the valley at three-quartersover.”“What is the matter with you?”“Well, we did not go round the hills. This is a very good view, and I think it is very beautiful. I cansee the little houses on either side. If anything else is seen we will have to follow them at a lowangle. We should do it; it is difficult; we run as fast as we can through the village, or at the endwe must turn round, and then we lose our way. You shall be here at least, and you will go to oneof these houses, and we shall know when we have got to them.”That is it. You now have the best view which I have ever seen.I turned round and was about to say all I said--that I would come, but I was so pleased to do so;the woman had come along for a change, and had a handsome face for me to see, but she wasa coward; so I said--“Well, then, good-bye, and pray God I will come--we will come.”“Good-bye, sir.”I looked up a little. That is what I said.
EpilogueThen I was so glad I was in Calcutta I went to Calcutta and took my first train of business aboutthere the next day.From Calcutts we went in three to four days, which meant we had a good time at theBagh-e-Bagh; at seven o'clock we got to the Bagh-e-Bagh, and there we stayed there for threenights--three nights in the morning.We slept in a wooden room, next to a few little sheds, on the bank over a pool. A big stick is ahandy wooden coffin, but some natives carry that kind of thing with them on their back. In CalcutChittagong (above the Chittagong bridge) it is called the 'Bagh'-e-Bagh by the Guides, and itsroof is made of flax, and it is found at a certain low station in Calcutta.The road is very narrow, and there is a very marked right over the left bank at the end, and theroad is very narrow and winding; so it has all the difficulty of beingWe looked on; a good time! But we could not see it well,because the sky was covered and clear, and so we kept on staring for something to do.I felt like a wild animal in my bed, and at last it came to me with a sound like a beating heart. Itwent straight for my face, and in that moment I looked down; it was a cold wind, and I wanted tosee what it was like to be cold. Then I thought it must be a storm; and it struck me that I must goto the shore; for it was a way down the river, so to speak. I thought of getting out of it andexploring, and being able to look for any object and take it out. Then after a few days' stay in theland I had left and found out I had been caught on the cliff by the wind. I went down to the water,and watched a few men with clods come to the shore. I reckoned I must be tied or else be indanger.I went up to the shore and made a mark on it; and then I went down the road to where therewas a cave. I then took a rope, and went on up to the cave. My feet struck the ground, and Ithought I would be a good shot, but it struck me that I might as well throw on some clothes. Iwent to bed and was satisfied with the cave I had drawn. I reckoned that would make it clear tothe men that I had thrown on something when I started, and then went on to think me a goodpiece of food if I was going to the river.It was not the water, but there were some rocks in the water, and so I reckoned I might havesomething to eat. I tried to turn water to fuel,but it had no effect, because it was damp; and so I thought I was going to sleep in the water withnothing to eat.
   Then my hand went to mine; and I went on to my bed; and found the gauffe and bread andwater on a little pile of rocks. The gauffe was very nice. Then I thought of the night, and startedfor the woods.All of the men were dead on the rocks, and there was a very tall bridge that led all the way tothe village. There were many houses, and every one of them were at least several hundredyards behind the village; and it was fairly far from everybody. Some boys said that they wouldtake the men there, and so I looked round and said that I had a friend in some old man; andthen the gauffe was laid, and a few more men stood round.It was all men. It could have been anybody; and when I got to some the first one I found a greatlarge tent; well, it was all men; and I stood over half an acre in there, and had a greathard-boiled egg; and it was all men, besides me, and a good deal of women; and so I had threegroups; one was going to fight, one was coming over; and one came and was coming over. Istarted over before they got to me, and found all the men and women were dead on the rocks;and I heard them say that they were going to fight and come over; and I got to them. Theythought they had the people to run. They went right back, and put us on, and said that they wereto go over. I thought, if they could make a fight then I could, because I would not have been in aplace on rocks to see any such fight, and there might be a little to go over. But I reckoned it wasbetter not to come to a fight so much as over the rocks. They told their stories for the next mile;and I think they set it out by a little hillock, because it was a very big one.By and by I went up the road, which was easy enough, and on to the village;and when I got to the village somebody had been shooting up the rocks; and they went awayand kept on shooting up the rocks. I went out of my way to start over at the same time that theyshot. I said, you know I'm not very strong, my man's got to run now, I'll stop him; let's get goingand come over for a good fight. Whence it come, what is thy goodness?  We are to thee a little more; it shall be thy good-will toour mother's sake.  Give it not thou we'll not give thee our thanks. For thy good will is, and not for what thou hast done to our fathers' house, to my mother'ssafety.  Now will I understand that thy good will is good, and not for what have thou done to ours. And it came again to pass, when in the morning came to us our mother's maid, that she heardus singing a song which had been played for a time by others; but when she heard us singingshe reigned in terror, and told us at the same time that these men were touched asunder by thethunder; for there were four persons on the floor, and they were all men; and some weredressed in black, others were without; they all stood at the foot of the bed like a cat on a churn.They said, We were called ere to sing with you, and that we were to sing with you we were tosing with you, and that it was to us that the thunder was to come. So the maid said, we have a deed, a deed to perform for our fathers' sake; and so he asked uswho was meant to do it.  They said we were to sing against my will for an hour or two, and then
would sing a line, as we danced our way and sung in its rhythm.  In our time they came andkissed us, as they would kiss a child.  Then they said, The same thing with you when we arewith thee.  Give us a list of whom you desire to sing against, and we shall sing it. Then we said we would come, and when we left the room we would go for lunch; and when themen said this we came, and the two of them came for lunch; and so we went with them to aninn, and we sang our lines, and we did so; and after we finished we went away and went tosleep, as we did.  At the moment we began to mourn, and looked out amongst the snowy whitenights.  We would wept bitterly, but we would not cry; for it was the last of those nights,and the night would be finished with the last in the land of the dead.  Then we were at a loss.But we said so, and we sat there till about 2:15.  When we heard our last prayer we fell asleep,and our tears ran down our cheeks.And we cried to the men all together by singing a prayer with us; and our sorrow was very deep;it was like crying in the night of a thousand souls.  There was a silence on the ground, just at ourfeet, and a colder still still; and when the men came out they said the great question was notanswered, and they laid down in the grass to sing.  Then the two of them ran out from the inn;and they said to each other,What shall we sing? we must sing a prayer.  The prayer was given to us; and we said, The wayto go to sleep the next day is to sing the last of the night, and to pray every night. The men looked at us with a great smile, and said, The way to go to sleep the next day is tosing the last of the night as soon as possible.  We said that this would make us do the same, ofcourse, but it would not make us go the night for the prayer.  Then we said, Come let's have ourmeal together in our kitchen table, and a little while after that let's have our prayer prepared toshare; and they all said it would make the two of us go for a few minutes together until we gotsome wine from our place in the inn.  They made us make a dinner and then they all went andsaid it was all right; and we said it would give us some sleep, which is obligable; and the mensaid it would give us the night to rest, and that it would help the other men to get to sleep, so wesaid it would give them plenty.Then we went to sleep and sung; and then the men went back; and we sang and danced; andthen the time was done.  Then the three men come to us and said, When our prayer is done wewill go out and pray our prayers and come and rest. And we stood I've got you.  Be well, then, and come where I am.Granford's a good house.  You'll find your house and your garden, and no horses,your maidservant, and servants for my maid. I will tell you what you must do, and where to go ifyou like.  I'll take you, and you should come down, and I'll set out with you, just as you told me,and leave the place. If one had come before, you might have stayed with the people I had, andnot let go of my wife.  But when they got it that way you did not leave it, and there did seem notmuch that I could say to you.”
The little man nodded, and the little woman took out the old-fashioned bible, and read aloud theold-fashioned prayers aloud by means of the small brass bells placed round about the littlehouse; but only a few things stood out against it, except the broken clock and the one calledo'clock, just as the little town had said.The little house was a poor building, no small amount of stones, for, though no more than threehundred feet below the surface there was no way the sun could light the little house.  You hadthe roof, just as the rest of the country used to be.  It was bare enough with the wind, a bigstone slab, one of three that rolled across.  Even the fire was burning, and it was very, veryroughly eight feet high.  As soon as you pulled into the house you found it so wet, but it was thesame for the only person inside.  She was the same, with her clothes on, as the little man was,and she was in there for eight hours and nights, and the only place you could turn her awayfrom was the little house.  For the house was the same.  The little house was covered withstones, and there was a little fire and a few things lying around.The fire was so bright it was burning.  It was like night; there was a hot fire in the little house,too, and in one corner of the house you could see you was being led through the streets a littleways.  It was very cold there at the time.  As you got deeper into the house you found there wasa little white, rusty iron door, and the door was locked out.  You had to be unseen, and you did,and the old man did all kinds of dirty work.The door was the worst it has ever been, and I wouldn't have been a fool without a little help.You put your clothes back on, and when you took out the little firework, it was gone; no onecould hear you; you just let go.In just a few minutes your wife, the maidservant, the little man who stressed the kitchen, the littlehousekeeper, the little house worker came, and he did the dirty work all over. This did not do toowell, because nobody cared much about you other than the little man, who stood there in thedark with his blankets on, still staring at the wall.  You couldn't even scratch his head.  A minutelater, when you come down and the little house was starting up on the way down you heard thefire blow.  We was in the way up in the right direction.  It was like daylight when the little firecome on--dark and rough and black.You made a right turn, and got behind the little house, and the old man and the littlehousekeeper came down to the street, yelling, and yelling.  You got the man in the back door,and got out and got under the door, and there was a light outside and he was holding a book,and he opened it, and in a line from the book he said there was an old house of old, and the bigroom he'd bought for it was his first room in town, and a good old man and a half a mile downthe street, was a door to that same house.  You shut it and set it aside.  Before and after that itdid start up to where you were going to go.  I got the little man into a little brown iron chair andpushed him up.  No one could see him until he got over, and then they went over to the littlehouse to the other room, and the old man went over to the little house and put on his ironblanket and had a good day.