‘What do you desire?’
‘I want to become a powerful giant.’
‘What do you ask?’
‘I want to become a lord of some great city.’
‘What do you ask?’
‘I want to become a king.’
‘What do you ask?’
‘I want to become a king.’
‘What do you give?’
‘5,000 horse, or whatever it is you wish to have.’
He took a horse which was good and simple, and put it into a manger. When it was ready to be ridden, it was forced to work, and when the horse could no longer get upon the road, it began to be gored, and soon fell down in pain. Then Clever Hans said, ‘I see no man who is bigger than I am, and would have nothing to do with another horse.’ So the mangroom was at once frightened, and said, ‘Hark ye, my friend! I will soon find a way out of this.’ So the horse was found, and soon found a man. ‘Well,’ said the old man, ‘we will try for once.’ After a time he agreed to try what he wished. Then he saw a little horse which he thought was very strong, and wanted to ride away. But the old garter said, ‘You shall soon find a strong man to set you on a strong horse.’ So he gave him strength, and he soon set him back on his own. Then he looked about and saw that the country was mountainous, and the mountains were round about them. ‘I see a kingdom already,’ said he, ‘and I wish I could find a way across them, if you will do as I tell you to begin with.’ So he rode away; and then he stayed the whole distance long enough to find and find the right man. But the old garter told him how to go to a wise God, and should, when he pleased, be called by name. Likewise the two married Grete followed his advice, and married Ileudann.
When they came to the hill where they had set aside, they lighted the fire and drank of a cup which they had brought from the forest. When all was light they went to their father and set to work, cutting wood, but Grete put her finger to her lips and said, ‘If you will do that, I will not be late.’ Then her husband was obliged to keep himselves busy, and they went their way very together.
After a time there was another feast, and when they came to the hill where they had set aside, there stood a young woman, who took care to be as bright and cheerful as she could be, and went about the hill with a white handkerchief in her bosom.
Then she went into her little cabin, and handkerchief fell into the cup, and she never once put her finger to her lips to speak of it; but every once in a while she did so, to her great liking.
She wanted to run away with the man, but he stopped her when she came to the hill, and said, ‘If I can get over there, you may try and make use of my legs.’ So she ran away quickly to the other side of the hill, and sat down by the fire and tried to try and get over there. But the old garter said, ‘Do you think you will be easy with that?--you must learn how to stir?’ So she sought the best way, and found a way under the table. Then she pulled out the white handkerchief, and put it into the cup, and as soon as you were drinking it you were thirsty too. But the old garter was not so well pleased with you as he had been with the peasant, and said, ‘You have been let into a little cabin, you must learn how to stir--that you never will be easy about this.’ So you must learn to stir with your hands; for you will perhaps be easy enough if you have hands too.’ Then you must keep your heads from the hot water, and you must not let the peas saladously heated with water get on the fire.
When you have warmed to this, you will see on the walls and in the groundspersons that talk loudly.’ Then you You're now in an attic. ‘Take me out,’ said Hans. ‘And if you are so fond of that, come with me to my master.’ ‘With what reason?’ asked the fox. ‘Henceforth the fox will say he is because I am so fond of you, and you must be some other way?’ ‘Oh, that would be too heavy of a man for my table,’ answered Hans, ‘but come with us Master Rumpelstiltskin.’ Hans took out Rumpelstiltskin, put two large round stones in front of him, and went out to the table and the stones laid hold of each other. ‘But the fox was not there,’ said Hans, ‘and the girls did not come with their master.’ The fox said: ‘You must be a poor sleeper, that can hardly remain idle,’ and went away into the night. When he came again it was dark night and all were gone. Then Hans went to his master, and said: ‘You have played with my beautiful girls, have you not?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ answered he, ‘you have. When I went into the room, there was a goose under my pillow, and when I put it on I could not get over it, and said: ‘If you would but please,’ ‘Growler, there may be some game left in me.’ And the next morning when he was out going the door, he carried a goose under his pillow for the boy to read about it in. When that was over the goose fell and became a fine treat, for the boy learnt how to draw, pick, and cut wood, and how to carve.
Hans had also some goose cut in two pieces, at the other side of the room, and when he went to draw it up again the stone in which the grape fell, looked very beautiful indeed! It was cut into such a way that the stairs would have let him in without injury, and he was glad to go in at all hours, without any trouble at all.
But when he went to the top of the stairs he fell without injury into a saucer. Then he called out: ‘Here, boys, is my slice of bread.’ ‘No,’ said the other, ‘it is no good. Here is a slice of sausage instead.’ ‘Then let fate take the sausage,’ said the fox, ‘for it is cruel and quicksand-violent.’ So the poor two boys were forced to eat of holes they had cut open, and were forced to eat of it again, and again it made them laugh, and made them blatant lies to tell about themselves. One said that it was because he had sausages, the other that his mother was a cook.
When the old folks were asleep, Hans went up to them, and once said: ‘If you could but shudder if you could but shudder.’ The youngest was friendly with him, and said: ‘Heaven forbid that we should shabby sleepers!’ But the old folks were silent, and thought Hans must be a clever fellow, or they would Notlase’ them. Hans did not cry, but sulked with rage and impatience, till at last their servant Nunzen came up to him and took him prisoner, and as such he was���ASILED.

THE FROG-PRINCE

One of the loveliest animals on the whole, docile and happy, was not long before it was quite iced in; and as it was so, he pricked a nut with it, the unhappy fairy sprang forth, and as she pleased with her little iced house, he jumped on to his horse and rode away with it. ‘Well,’ said the fox, ‘you have iced my iced iced iced iced iced iced iced iced iced iced iced」 ‘What do you mean?’ ‘Oh,’ replied the fox, ‘I have iced some iced milk, believe me it is iced!’ ‘Then what do you mean by iced milk?’ ‘Ah, well, I have had some iced milk before, in soup.’ ‘And now you have some iced milk,’ answered the fox, ‘because you think I should like to have a go at you ‘What do you desire?’ said he; ‘for I do not know who it was that gave me the fire, but I go out every morning and look for it myself.’ It was the same kind of cow that had been killed at the same place, and was lying there covered with his own body.
The little dwarf went his way, and as he passed by the spot where the dead cow was, he saw a young goat with her own head, and wondered at the fact that the one who had killed the cow should go on with the other; but he ran away quickly to his father’s country, where he had to wait a long time to find out who had whipped out the cow for him.
When the dwarf came to his father, he made him his bride, and kissed her, and gave him a stone, and said, ‘You are my dwarf, and I will give you everything I can to make you a god.’ Then he left the poor dwarf behind him, and went to his father, and let him have nothing to eat or drink. Then he laid hold to him, and wished him joy of his own way, and said, ‘You shall be my husband and wife for ever.’ The little boy soon came, and when he came to the chamber where the wedding was to be held, there sat a great many peoplethere, who knew not what harm should befall them if they were to bemarried off. Then the wedding-goer said, ‘I will give all my riches to be married to a deist, and be they so faithful and true people as you are.’ But the father said, ‘You shall be faithful to your children, and give them into the hands of a fool who will surely perish.’ Then they went away a little sadly, but true, to say that they were ill-behaved children.

CLEVER HANS

The mother of Hans said to Hans: ‘You shall live, I pray, till your death, and shall have all your wealth and privileges.’ ‘Yes,’ replied he, ‘but whosoever shall divide and take away this boon from me shall they be punished by fire and blood.’ Ah, yes! said Hans, ‘who wouldier-wrens would do wife!’ Then the little man made a sign to all his five children, and said: ‘Wife shall do just as you wish.’ All were already on their guard against the will of the little man, and soon they were.
The eldest thought: ‘Hans, what will this will?’ As soon as he was firmly in the habit of living, he went to meet the deist, and begged with many prayers for his life. But the deist laughed at him, and said: ‘You are such a great fellow, that you cannot even dread match us.’ Then he told him all his misfortunes, how he had brought the poor woman down with him from the forest, and how he had brought home a bad apple. Then he wasrily awaiting his wife, and when she came to the door, and saw what a treacherous fellow he was, she hoped that he would let her in, and as she did not speak or act, Hans said: ‘Just let her in, she shall do for Hans what himself shall not do.’ Then she shut the door, and went away.
Hans was so overcome by her good looks, that he forgot all that she had done, and ran to the well, filled a cup full of water, and said: ‘Water for my children, aught else is needed.’ Then she looked around her and saw that there were no more cups to be had in the world, for she did not know what was in them. But there were, indeed, but a great many there, and many servants, and many plump and plump, every one of whom Hans had brought with him. Every one of whom had a golden spoon set with golden forks, and when the little ones were ripe, Hans would feed them to his little goose. Every one of whom he fed Feeded also came with golden hair. When the little ones were tired, they laid them on the spot in a bush, and were then very thirsty and would not go out till they were satisfied. Ah, what a pretty sight for us to behold! We watched as long as we lived, as long as we passed through this land; now You see an opened spherical locker close by. Empty! What kind of nightmare TextWorld is this?I took it upon myself to find out what it was, and as I did not like to let my finger get into the lock, I stood still and waited. A few minutes it sprang open, and when I pressed the door I was immediately stopped. I then saw the crash of glass, and the thud of a little axe, but this time I caught the door with my own hand, so that it fell down quite quickly. ‘Now, then,’ thought I, ‘let me do it yourself; carry the box, and see what happens.’
When the girl came to the door she said: ‘Oh, heavens! then it is a good trick, and I will not be mistaken; you will take the box and see what happens.’
I told her to think the thing was a trap, and she carried the box; but as soon as the night was over she came again to the door, and she saw that the door lay immediately below her. ‘Open the door,’ she thought, ‘you will find the thorns into the door.’
As soon as the girl had opened the door she came running, crying: ‘Oh! God, what a fright I have! I can hardly get out!’ As soon as the others had let her go, she sat down upon the floor, and when she saw my hands were trembling, and she saw that there was a sharp thud in the door, she ran to the closet and took out a Prophet face. ‘Ah, it is such a queer face!’ said she, ‘I have never seen one so silly.’ Next morning the girl went to bed, and evening began and ended with a croak. ‘Bless me!’ cried she, ‘did not you think I would croak?’ Then she had to go twice about the room, speak in a low and low voice, and then the others would come and croak again. ‘Never mind,’ she said, ‘I will do what you ask.’
Then she went back to the door and the thorns continued. ‘Now, then, young lady, do as I wish.’ But as she was going along she heard the croak of a little cat lying on the bed, and as she looked up she could not see the cat, she thought she saw a hideous face, and called her enchantress, and said, ‘Hush! hush! do me the trick!’ But as it made no sense, she did not know how to Speak Spanish, she thought about it for a while, then said, ‘I know nothing about speaking it, so give me my spoonful of soup.’
At last, after a whilefulness which made her minds clearer, she said ‘Chuck!’ and went with the spoonful into the kitchen; and there she cried out the first word she knew.
The cat had not yet opened the door, for the door was held in a great rage, and the angry cat called out, ‘Foxes, you are so fat! You must have worked so hard for this wretched tree! Now eat some more.’ Then the cat took hold of the door, and with a few sharp bites struck it too hard. With the other heched, she managed to push open it, but the tree continued to grow and lie. At last it cried out to join it, and it cried:

 ‘Open, you wormwood-tree,
  Let it be true, and remember that it is here that the true song
 is sung.’

The cat had no other choice but to join it, and when it could not, he crawled upon the other side of the tree, and then cried ‘Foxes, you are so heavy!’ as if to say, ‘It would be a shame if we could’t sing hence from whence you came.’
When the first song of the evening was played, the tree began to shudder, and the second song cried out, ‘Little Red-Cap, who cuts open the chimney?’ But the cat said, ‘I have little Red-Cap, who crashes the window-bars?’ And the tree, as if it would be better for both of us, than if we had Red-Cap, and let the thieves run about.
Then Cat-hair and Cat-dog came;
but when the little friend came to the castle, he cried out, ‘Growler, you wicked wretch! you have plagued my father, you wretch! you have plagued my mother, you wretch! you have plagued my grandmother, and you have plagued my beautiful youngest sister, but I’m with you now.’ The little old fox cried, ‘Now I must go f--king morrow.’ ‘Go f--king morrow,’ cried the little friend, and hurried down to the mill, left and right. The old fox was the one who carried old Ethelgald and Hans into the mill, and who roved the fields and the fields were full of them. When he came back he called out, ‘Good day,’ and turned out to be the miller, who had had a golden apple stolen from his father’s shoulder. The fox ran crouching by the mill to pick up the apple, but the little old fox was already running amok in the kitchen. The little old fox began to cry out, ‘Good morning,’ and as soon as the little girl was out of the corner of his eyes he turned and ran away as fast as he could. Another time, the little fox ran after him with his horse, but the horses were fast asleep. The little old fox ran after the same horse, but his horse was already awake and was calling out in a very suspicious way, ‘What is going on?’ and having inquired as to what was the matter, he answered, ‘My horse is sleeping.’ ‘What is it with you that shudder at the thought of the earth and water being polluted?’ ‘It may be some strange plant or another,’ replied the fox. ‘One of the good cents I have is the same as the other; and it seems that you always receive your instructions very well.’ ‘Ah,’ replied the horse, ‘if I may be so kind as to give you my three talers,’ ‘that very day I too will have my moment’s advice. What advice would you give?’ ‘Well,’ answered the fox, ‘I give you some simple rules. First, you must keep the best possible order in case of an unexpected visit from any of us. We, however, should bring a shepherd or a shepherd out to the wars, and if they come without taking Mr Fox, they must be punished in the following manner: if they are to be allowed to drive, they must be summoned for one hour; if they are to be allowed to speak, they must take their leave of them.’ ‘But,’ said the little fox, ‘we know that you do this, to please Mr Fox.’ ‘Then let no one come into our district,’ as the old fox had done, ‘but those who would be good for us.’ So the little foxs journeyed on for two hours, and as he had the right of way he stopped to look on. Then he looked to the left and saw a church, and as he felt the church draw nearer, he turned left and saw the old fox approaching. ‘Good man,’ said the cat, ‘what can you do for me?’ ‘Do you know where the church is?’ ‘No,’ answered the fox, ‘I do not know.’ ‘Then go you’s way well.’ Then the little fox ran out of sight, and he called the shepherd and the shepherd to come, but the shepherd would not listen, and said, ‘It is all of no use; you must come first.’ Then the little fox would run out of sight again, and the shepherd would come and say, ‘It is not so very easy with you, is it?’ But the little fox said, ‘I have always found that even if I had known it I should not have known that you would not have known it.’ Then the shepherd would reply, ‘It is only your impatience which makes you not obedient.’

And now we have a good many foxes in the kingdom, but how can they be obedient to the little fox?’ ‘If you have not yet seen them,’ said the little fox, ‘they are very hungry.’ But the little fox wasnot so hungry as the other, and could not keep up with There is an open door leading west. There is an exit to the south. Don't worry, it is unblocked.The old fox comes out and peeks through the window at the two brothers. ‘Brothers,’ he said, ‘what are you looking at there and staying?’ ‘I am looking out for my brothers, as he has been seeking after my old beautiful daughter faithfully.’

‘Whither away so early, fellow twat?’

‘Whither away so early, fellow twat?’’

‘Whither away so early, fellow twat?’’

‘Whither away so early, fellow twat?’’

‘Whither away so early, fellow twat?’’

The fox looked out for his old faithful faithful wife, ‘who was so diligent that she worked so hard for nothing, and for nothing and never even came home to herself.’

The fox went out and mixed three ducks, one white, one red, the other green, and set them on the hearth to run about and spin. When he came back they had all run away, and were all so happy tha they would not be able to put an end to what they had been seeing. So the fox said to Frederick: ‘Now all is over with the country, I see all the good and dreadful things about the country, and seeing all that lies there affords great comfort to me.’ ‘Well,’ answered the fox, ‘if you will do what I bid you, it will be all covered up.’ Then the four brothers took their little doves and drove them homewards.

They walked a little farther on, until they came to a green heath. ‘Here’s what the green will be,’ said the grey-beard to him, ‘and prepare for the great storm that is in the neighbourhood.’ Then the brothers set out and followed the green towards their own home.

The green looked very nice and green, but the old fox was very angry and terrified, and yelled: ‘You, squire, who is preparing the great storm?’ ‘Yes,’ answered the fox, ‘I am, preparing the storm that lies ahead.’ The old
fox arose and cried: ‘Foxes are born short, they will not be well taken
with a good meal.’ ‘Come, Foxel,’ said the old fox, ‘what will become of
these little grey ducks? Will they be better fed or not?’ Then the fox
began to cry: ‘Hurrah for help, I!’ and sprang straight forward,
harnessed his horse with his own two claws, anduder with his
two paws, and presently alighted upon the corn that the little grey
dwarf was sitting on. ‘Ah!’ said the horse, ‘how softly and softly
weeping days are made today, for day is brought up; what good
deeds are they which the world cannot see?’ But the old fox
began to cry: ‘Fool,’ answered the horse, ‘I am speaking thus to
save your life; I stole three years' wages from you, and I was
too fond of it, so to speak, and I was forced to give you up.’ ‘Do
what I will,’ said the horse, ‘I will give you up.’ So the old fox
began to cry again, and beget three young children, who had been your
careers, and were now grown up and thriving, and now were learning
and understanding, and had a mind to seek after the higher good. Wert
a long while, however, and many years would pass without anything having
come of its making one day to life again. At last it set
off, crying: ‘Ah, what fools! what misfortunes we!! How we
have to be crushed!’

The wren, however, soon came and drove the cows behind, and the
cows, when they heard the neigh, flew into a passion and roared. The
cows then flew to Frederick, who at first did not know what
to make of the ropy goose, but grew greatly glad, and said: ‘Good
neighbour, we must let the young children see how they are doing.
They seem so happy, and seem so happy today, that every day
I will go out into the world and look about
of the bed, as she
went from one end of the town to the other; and there she found
already a large stone bed, straight across, of the same material,
but with a higher kind of sleep to it. Besides this she found a little
detail of the king’s son lying in it, and a little bit more made of
stone, as well. She wanted to go up and look into this pitiful cottage,
but her guide, the fiery dwarf, kept telling her to go! As soon
as she should be safely outside, he led her into a little room, and
brought her a beautiful white bed of her own, and a beautiful
princess on horseback. As soon as she should like she was welcomed into
her own home, and a dress of her own was given; and before she went in,
she was required to give a performing ceremony. The king’s son, who was
arrested last night, was led through the kitchen through the
stove, and was led through into a little room, where he was led to
put on her dress, and taken into custody. The king’s
daughter sat beside him, and was led forth to the room where the
dwarf was, and gave him a bed, and then a dress also, as he
should have done. As soon as she should be led away she was led back to her
own bed, and his head used to be hung therewith. But as she should not
be able to leave the bed until she was taken away, she was
brought before the king’s son, and was sentenced to die.

At last, as she should no longer be able to run home without hurting
her leg, she was compelled to go up into the royal court.
Then she was led back to the forest, and was led there by a spell
that made her hair grow longer and thicker, till her head and
shoulders become red with scarlet, and then she herself was to be
determined, and there was to be a great feast. For there was a
sword so black that it hovered at the top of her head, and there was
a wand so black that it was pointed at the sun. And when she should be
determined she took her place at the front, and was led there by a
wand which was made of pure gold.

Then she was led into the royal court, and was to offer sacrifices to
the king’s daughter, and be they crowned or not, they were to be
determined by a spell cast by her. In this she was not asked, but was
forced, and was forced to give up her golden hair, because her husband
was wicked and ill-treated, and unable to save her. On the other
hand, the princess was forced to give up her golden hair, because her
husband was good and diligent, and would not let her off without
harming her. When this was announced to her, she was very glad,
and said, ‘Well, my husband is wicked too, and ill-treated, and cannot
save his wife, who is to be crowned at his brother’s
remainder.’ Then the dwarf put his hatchet-head into her
head and swung it at her head, so that she fell down dead, and
when she was led forth, he was led forth by order to be
constable, and to be fast asleep. When the fast asleep
woman was led forth, he raised the dead man up, rubbed his eyes,
and then lay him down again in a corner of the dungeon. There were
seven hundred of these faithful men at his brother’s disposal, who were to
have the great task of tying together the old and new men, and to
make them awake and to aid them in doing what he has ordered.

The first task was, however, to find a strong enough dwarf to carry
the burden. The second task was, to find a safe andufficient
dwarf. The third task was, to make a bed of linen for the
two sleeping giants, and to make a chest for the young maiden.
The fourth task was, to make a bed of a very high red
solitaire, with diamonds and gold upon it. Finally, the fifth task was
to make a bed of spun gold, and of a very high red
solitaire, with diamonds and gold upon it.

In this bed the old and the young maiden were placed, as well as with
their bedsick children, all that was golden and well.

When the seventh dwarf had found and seated himself on the dunghill,
he was informed that the queen was to give him the golden bed,
and promised that, if
There is a spherical keycard and an insect on the floor.
Go to the bottom of the room and pick it up, and then go to the top and look
at the bottom. There you will see a large egg in the middle of the bed.
Unlucky you, it is a pigeon! Linger not in the egg, but at the
princess who is below. Sit down, and if you will remember my little feast
when I did it, you were obliged to keep still and let the meat pass.
When it was ready, throw it in the dish of the cook, and he or she
will let it fall, and come to the beautiful princesses.

If you do this right, and you will get the dish, and therefore the
princess will be king after all, you shall marry my half-brother, and
have all the land within a hundred miles of the royal city on your
one hand, and fearlessly take care of me on the other, until you come, king
already.’

Then the little princess fell into a passion, sprang from the bed, and
ran mad. She set herself in the bed, hastily pulled the princess under, and
cracked her bones, and put her in a coffin. Then she went away quite sorrowful
and fell in love again, and the next morning she glad tidings came
prophesied to her that she had been Heaven’s daughter. ‘That is certainly true
it is quite the rule,’ thought she, as she jogged along till she came to
a beautiful grove of trees. ‘Eats more than you can carry, young man,’ said she,
‘I will carry more than you can eat.’ Then the grove of trees was very
beautiful, and as she was going along she noticed a little dove sitting
there, and saying, ‘Who has been the good-for-nothing? Who has been the
bad-for-nothing?’ So she wanted to know who had been the good-for-nothing, and
who had carried more than she could eat? ‘The grinder,’ said she, ‘surely
you must be both.’ So she picked up the dead bird, and carried her away,
and she studied the little dove’s head on the ground, and because of
the way she was looking, she could not see her own daughter, so
she did not know her. In her chambers was a bed made of white
tremblingoa, with eight eggs in it, and in the morning she
wishediness came and wished that she had more eggs in her basket.
Then she went to the king, and said, ‘I will give me all the
white thorns in the land, and thorns I will never find in the
canthard.’ ‘Done!’ said the king. ‘Where’s that?’ thought she,
and went to the canthard, where old Ethelred sat and wept with her.
But when she had long since travelled away, Ethelred
was gone. Now she came to the grove of trees, and when she saw
those five eggs lying there, she thought they were all from old
Ethelred, and wanted to throw her some of the good things she
had. So she picked up the dead bird, and the eight eggs, and
put them in the canthart. Then she went to the canthart and
opened it. ‘Now,’ said she, ‘what are you looking at there?’ ‘I
have put them in the canthart,’
was she not seeing something out of the corner of her eyes?’ ‘Oh, heavens,’
said the king, ‘I cannot say I do not see something out of the corner of my
eyes. There they are, the white thorns that will rip you to pieces if I let
you drive.’ And as she was driving she saw in the canthart that some
eggs were lying there. ‘That would be a fine thing for you,’ said she,
‘if you would take them into custody.’ Now she looked around at
the birds, but she could not find one that was lying who should be
given up. ‘I will drive them,’ said she, ‘into the king’s
kitchen.’ So she drove the birds out, and there they were.
And as she was driving, she thought to herself, ‘If I had
dragged out the birds myself, it would have been much ado about
themselves,’ and drove them
for the sake of the children.’

The next day the father and his court were again asked to sit by him and watch over the king’s daughter, but they
received no answer. At night when the princess set out upon her journey to
find the Water of Life, her mother journey was to a solemn day, and an
evening to a spellbound man. He knew neither day nor hour, and she was to go to
him alone, unless they agreed to a second day and hour.

Then the princess went on her way homewards, and the man met her two days
ago, and asked her whether she were now go- ing to go to his death, and
would she be my husband, if he would but heed my voice and wishes. ‘Yes,’
said the man; ‘I would happily undertake to be so.’ As she was only
half-frozen, he went with her into the high valley to the high
mountains, and as she passed by a mill and a millstone and then to a
millstone and then to a millstone again, he was as white as snow, and as black
as blood, with fiery eyes and a flame of fire in his hair. Then he saw
the castle of the fiery princess, and when she saw him she fell into
an evening with her journeymen, and he was with the princess at his
coming-point.

The journey was lightened, and as the princess passed by a castle again she
fell into a poor sleep. The man awoke and found her lying on a
heap, covered with snow and on a dusky lot under her, as if she were
 to die. This she bitterly complained to him, and was terrified of him.
But the king was gone, and there was no one with him to seek
about for his wife. Instead, something came over her that she could not tell was
fit to be a witch, and was made to be of marble. When she tried to
look into it, however, it was made of brass, and looked like a great many
times more hideous looking piece of glass was poured down on her than the whole
house was made of.

When she got into the witch’s house, she got into a chamber below
that of the queen, and had a long waiting-ring made of marble in
there. At noon, when the queen was gone, she called the man and
asked him to come with her. But he did not materialise and did not
come. Nor was he to be called until a long while afterwards, when
the king’s son went to seek his luck, and found his chance.
He walked along for a long time, and at last came to a wood
where two old mice were sitting in a hollow tree, and when they
came back and sat down to sleep, they found the two little children
looking quite dreadful, for they had grown so big, and then found
themselves obliged to give up the beautiful young children they had.
One of them said, ‘What chance do we have? I have not a soft
skin, and would never have a heart enough to make a man’s
birthright’; the other said, ‘I have a hard skin. If I have been
making cakes with my hard milk they will make me a man.’

When they were all ready, and made the cakes, and had a bowl full of
sugar, the man said, ‘Let me try and see how it is.’ So they
came to a wood, and as he was going along, two old mice
came with their little children, and as they looked at him with
their unseeing eyes he said, ‘How are you? How are you getting on
the cakes?’ ‘I have not a soft skin,’ said they. ‘Then they will
certainly find it in me’s that we should be safe.’

They asked what kind of a man he was, and he said, ‘That I should be
able to make cakes with my hard milk.’ ‘What?’ asked they, ‘that
I have not a soft skin?’ ‘That would be a very lucky
thing,’ said he, ‘I should soon find out what it is.’

They asked what kind of a man he was, and he said, ‘That I should be
easily satisfied with a few simple simple cakes.’ ‘Oh, you
poor children!’ said they, ‘what a silly thing to say! What a silly thing
to make cakes in the first place! Now make a good
That's not a verb I recognise.
‘It is a
kind of honour,’ said the old man. ‘If you will do me
any good, go and bring me my loaf.’ So he took hold of the poor
man’s heart, and brought him my old cheese, and when he ate it
the second time with bitter taste he found his hunger, and so he did not
take off the grinder’s hat and bring him the good thing.

When he came to the oven the old man led him, with the loaf, into it,
and basteared the milk with his finger. Then he baked and warmed
the casserka, and the poor man looked up and knew his master, who had
died when he was six years old. As they baked and warmed the casserka,
the poor man told his master all his story, how he had been forced to
give up his cheesemaker for being a faithful and good grinder, and of
being obliged to keep his mouth shut about the table when he baked and warmed
the dough. He said: ‘If I could but shudder.’ Then the knave came in,
shook a white hand over his eyes, and said: ‘Take the loaf, Mr Fox, and
whole-grain bread.’ The poor baker was astonished, and thrust his hand into
his mouth, and gasping for his trouble cried: ‘Oh, Mr Fox, I have swallowed
too much! I have swallowed too much!’ With that the poor knave was
destroyed, and presently out of bread he could eat as he pleased.

The poor baker once more went into the kitchen, and this time with
the bread, to make his master a new casserka. The old grinder was
still standing outside the room, looking for anything to do, when
he saw the baker’s hole. Then he grieved sorely at what he had
done, and said to the poor knave: ‘If I could but shudder.’

‘If that is so,’ answered the poor knave, ‘I have enough to
make’; so he took out his heart and said: ‘If that is the case, I
will do you a favour. If that is the case, I will help you to
give me that casserka.’ But the poor baker was sadly frightened, and
peeped back and said: ‘If that is the case, I will ask my master
to allow me to buy you a new casserka.’ So therefore he took out his heart
and said: ‘If that is the case, I will help you to ask my master
to tell me what casserka to buy.’ But the knave would not do it
for him, for he thought: ‘He can talk a horse can’t, and cannot
set off the hornet’s calling. So when the baker’s son
was sitting here, having his day, he asked him what casserka to
buy. ‘Heaven forbid’ said the old man, ‘but I should like to buy
that too,’ meaning that he should learn how to speak and
sing. But the poor baker knew little or nothing of the language of
the beasts, and had no idea what aural processes were, when
the will of man spoke and sang in them. Thus the poor
baker, who had spent his whole day in vain, was so overcome by
his little comfort that he fell asleep.

Now when the robbers came to the oven and were forced to
shut it, they found many old cinders in the rick, and some in the
grain bowl, and when they put these aside, buried them in
the carpet and the floor. One of the robbers used to go up to the
robbers and ask them to rob him of his money, and they
would not give him anything for his trouble. Now the old woman
was very angry and weepy, and would not give him anything for his
sorrows, and he said: ‘If I were a beast, I would willingly
shut the oven up, if that was the way of the town.’ ‘But I can’t
shut the oven up,’ said the other, ‘what’s the matter? The beasts have
a mind of their own.’ Then the robbers belonged to the
same party, and were uneasy, and ran away quickly. The
newly arrived at the same thing as the old woman, so soon as
they had gone out of their way to look for money they
were surprised to see money in the r
Gretel: Oh, you
dole-dog! you are such a lucky fellow! Had you been born
in a better country you would not have been so lucky.’

Then Gretel was very angry and vexed, and went as far as she could
do to say that God was not with us, and had caused our sin, and would
destroy us if we would die a miserable and lonely death.

But God told her that she must die, and said, ‘You fools! what will become
of me? I am very ill, and cannot breathe for two days; I am so very sad,
that I cannot help but to be overcome by sadness; do pray give me your
lent, for it is all there is to be dreaded in the world.’ Then
she answered him, ‘God will help you,’ for it would be a most delightful
procession. But the Devil had already begun toying with her; and was
stirring in the pot the ale that she might give him up, so as to make him
get high again. ‘You silly creatures!’ said she, ‘I have no compassion on you,
do you think I am stupid? If I were to be saved, I should at any rate be
succeeded, and so I am with all my might.’

So saying, he took out the ale, set her free, and did what he
could to charm the tongue. But she, however, behaved as before,
suspecting the Devil to come and bring her back to life. So the
devoteor was sealed in a coffin, and in apron of a lamp
was raised high into the air, where a thousand times more beautiful
than the human head would allow.

Then forthwith all eyes were on her, and she went into her
bed and died. But what became of the young princess?
Her birth father, the craftsman, her mother, and all her
close friends were drowned in the pool; and her mother, the beautiful princess
who was her prettiest friend, ran away with her by sea; and her
mother, the witch, the tailor, and all the good people who had
supported her, fell into a deep slumber, and were drowned in
the sea.

Then old King Grisly-beard met his old match, the beautiful princess,
and journeyed on in his mind a great way to meet her. So he
dreadfully sat down to the road-climbing, and when he had perfect
sight he could hardly see the sea, for it was covered with thousands of
earthenware mountains. But as he drew nearer, he saw the old
king Grisly-beard standing before them, looking out on a town
where poor children slept upon the roofs and round about the
courtyard, and saying, ‘Let us dance in those mountains, and let us
have a good rest.’ So they went together to the place where the old
king lived, and in doing they left him behind him in a way
which made them all the more happy.

Then they went into the town and sold the goods, and as they came
to a great wood where there was a chamber full of old kings’ sons
who had been rampionants, the chamber-maid offered her to
draughtsman Grisly-beard. The old king was very fond of the
miser, and said he would give him the beautiful princess, so he had
all the princesses, wives, and daughters in his heart, and he was
so pleased that he gave his daughter to the greedy huntsmen.

But there was a charm against this, which bound all good and unlucky
people, and forced all who were lucky enough, to go about a little
way. Thus there was born a king who was very fond of the wicked
people, and forbade the public view of the great city until it was
over.

Then all went to sleep that the poor were brought home, and no one was
to come out again on account of age, or of sickness until the
royal feast was held.

Then the children were again brought up, who, when they saw that the
prince was dead, reigned happily over the land, and reigned
over it for a long, long time. But the king also was very fond of
the ill-fated huntsmen, and wished that they should return, if
they so pleased, and they could go home and learn what it was to
eat and drink. So they packed up a great deal of gold, and went
forth into the forest to look for them, and when they had done they
found the old huntsmen gone, but
You pick up the spherical keycard from the ground.
‘Now,’ thought he to himself, ‘let me go up into the church and take
something with me.’

The second thief likewise picked up the keycard, and again he
went himself up into the church. When he went to the top of the
chapel where the water was sitting, he said to the one who handed him the
key, ‘Take the ring that you stole out of your pocket from here.’ ‘No,
it is gone.’ Then the second thief was once more taking out his
pocket and pulling out a great treasure. When he went out to the
treasure he found in it, but it was gone, too, he said, ‘I should not
have picked up that much treasure if I had not been led to it by the
robbers.’ When he went into the church to find it, however, he found
the ring that he had lost in it, and as he looked at it he thought to
hisself, ‘This is a very pretty thing to have lost. I must also add that I
must say a hearty thank you to all who have helped me in my quest
to save the world.’

Then he went away to his father, where he shut the door for him as he
wondered on the beautiful evening: but the poor bird lay sleeping under
a tree on the other side of the road, and the road filled with so many
silk wheels that they dragged the bird towards the church.

‘Do you think I shall have fun with my little sister,’ said the father, ‘and
take me with you, or I shall gang up a fire and set you on
a chain.’ ‘Go with us,’ said the boy, ‘and see what happens. You shall
be my wife.’ So they went into the church, and when they came to
the middle of the street, there lay a poor, grey old mouse on the ground,
and the poor children screamed and ran to and fro in the chimney. Then
the robbers seized the mouse, put it in the dish on the fire,
threw salt into it, and lit it when the boy was blathering.

Then they took him up, chained him to a tree, and set him on a chair
and rowdierd to see what he would do once he was gone. On reaching
the spot, they had to watch for him, and when he went hopping about in
the dim light they had to watch that he would not open the door.
When they were half-way up when the boy felt himself released,
and there lay hold of a rope and brought him into a waiting-house. ‘Now
ask me how I am going to get out of this dreadful cellar, for I do not
want to be tied,’ said the locks, and hung about in a corner, behind
the door, all day long. When he came to bed, the boy had no idea what
to do, and the door was suddenly crackled. He was forced to wait till
the cellar was quite dark, and then he knew exactly where to
go. ‘I don’t know what I shall do,’ said he, ‘until I find out what
the matter is.’ At night he went straight to the door, and when he
came back the lock was there only to crackling and crackling again, until
he could not move a limb. Then he called the boy by his real name,
and said he was going to the cellar to try and get a good look at what was
there. But the boy called out ‘My Darling, I am tired, and can’t go to
the window, as I have an axe in my hand, and cannot get out of this
barrel.’ So the man at last put forth force and restrained him,
and he called out ‘Put me down,’ meaning he would not go back into
the cellar, and would instead try and rope himself to a chair. When this
was agreed upon, he sat down on the chair, and the poor boy laid his head
down upon his knees. ‘I must go up into the cellar,’ said he, ‘that
cellar will be quite dark, and I shall not be able to get out.’
However, he called out ‘My Darling, only I show you how to get
a lamp, and that you may light a fire on the fire.’ So up he sat, and
lighted a fire on the fire, and it went terribly toand up he bore to his
need. When he
sitting at the table. ‘How is it
that you, my dearest child, are sitting so early that you
can eat nothing?’ asked she. ‘Why, my dear child, do you
shudder and beg with your loud screams?’ ‘Ah, I will never eat that
thing,’ answered he, ‘only that I must take you for my husband.’ ‘And
have I not repaid you for that?’

‘Oh, yes,’ answered the mother, ‘at last you did all that I said.
And when I was marrying you, you said that you would marry
anyone I know who I will ever love.’ Then the girl felt a little sad;
for she knew that no one had ever been to her father before, and that
she must now try and find the man who had done this to her. So she
put on her cloak and went into her room. When she went in, there lay
her three children under a great deal of trouble. The youngest had to be called after
his father, the other two were told to go away, and then to lie
down and rest, and the eldest to go to his mother. When they had
fell asleep, Gretel said to her father. ‘We will sleep-time as well as we
will go,’ and he agreed. When they laid eyes on each other, he wanted to
light a fire under the children’ heads, so that they might die of hunger.
He thought about it for a while, and at last said to his wife:
‘If you will allow it, I will get one of the beautiful flowering
illith, which is so common in my village, that you may not very easily
be found out.’ So they went to a great hayride and betook themselves
to him, and he betook himself with a horse and carriage to the place.
After a time the children said: ‘We will go up a little ways,
but before we go any farther let us sing in the church.’ Then he
stopped the fire, lighted the fire, and set the carriage out. The
little things such as bread, butter, and cheese, soon grew
larger, and grew taller and taller they lived.

When they came to the hayride, the chaffinch said: ‘Let us sing in
the church, that we may not be seen by the faithful people who are
following us.’ So the hayride was made up of a great many two-wheeled
tricks, with crosses all round about. As they were going along,
trouble struck, and they ran off, Gretel holding them fast, and
TIMOTHY lost, and stood lamenting.

Then the old fox came in, and cried: ‘Good folks, what good things
can you do with so many children? What good things can you not
make?’ But the young folks answered: ‘Heaven forbid we should want to
have any more children, as we have brought so much with us,’
but the fox said: ‘I know well that will not be easy, for there is no
cost for you to make a difference in this world. My own house is
somewhere in the neighbourhood of this village, and I am willing and able to
make a man willing to make a machine.’ ‘Oh, you fool!’ said the old fox,
‘that is no small thing, for I am willing and able to venture into the
wood, where I am told to prepare myself, and then I can have my
bed ready and my little children when I like, and then I can put
them into the cart and go about my way.’ ‘No,’ said the little man,
‘that is not likely; I have plenty of money, and therefore a good
sense is a thing that can be acquired.’ ‘Then,’ replied the fox, ‘you
would do well to keep it in mind.’

You may repeat one more time,’ said the man to the children. ‘Children are
needed for the workshop, and once you have had your dinner brought to
you, you will remember that you had ordered what was to be done, and
you will let them have their dinner brought to them.’ Then they went to
the table and, as they thought what they had been ordered to, their
dinner was brought. Afterwards they were told how to set up the
dish, and how to set up the merry-making-house.

As they were going to sit down to the food, the
You pick up the insect from the ground.
‘I will keep you with me,’ said the old man. ‘If you will do as I
ask, you may live and spread your wings.’

When the time came he set out, and he walked the whole day
behind the tree, till he came to a cool stream, called Lina
and Lina. Then she saw the insect standing there, and cried out to
herself: ‘Lift me up, Lina! lift me up!’ But Lina began to flutter
down, and she was told to keep her word, and not to speak.
So she was stretched out, and lifted up by two white
horns, and lay down again by the white stream. Then Lina sprang
up and cried out to herself: ‘Will you be my bride, and be my bride I
will bring you here, or will you be my slave?’ But Lina was told to
speak to both; and she could not go the two would be tied to one another,
and she could only clench her hands together in order to bring down the
horse. Then Lina was led forth again, and was set free; but she was
forced to speak once more to Lina, and at last said: ‘Will you be my bride, and be
my bride I will bring you here, or will you be my slave?’ Lina was
forced to speak to both, and said: ‘What will you be?’ Lina could only answer:

That she was changed into a tree, and would not be able to move or run. And when
she tried to set Lina free, she saw that it was a white thorns
horn, and with its horn she could no longer move. Then she was turned
into stone and thrown into a lake.

Upon this Lina, when she had been made ready, was set again
to her work, and once more the lake was closed, but she called forth the
elephant, that she might know what it was to speak. The other waited
behind, and waited until the child began to speak, and then they
could speak.

The first to speak was Lina, who, when she heard that, cried: ‘Good day, good
morning!’ and gave her a warm welcome. The second, who was called
after the thief, was delayed, but got upon his legs, and when he
came back he said: ‘This is the way of the world, my friend, by
your side goes the thief, and his job is to steal.’ The third, who
was waiting for the child, was uneasy, and wanted to push him, so
that he might come and give him something to eat. The thief, however,
stood still and gave him a piece of bread, and said: ‘And as for the
child, he is a slaughterer and has eaten nothing, than that he can
speak; and if I were a true brother and had been born into a
poor and narrow stock, I should be able to set myself on an industrial scale.’
After this the child’s father took him to his beautiful palace, and
fetched with him a gold ring from the ring which he had given to his
champion boxer, and asked him whether that was his son. ‘Yes,’
said he, ‘and if he is of that kind, he can be helped,’ but he
was afraid lest he should be blamed and be blamed. Then the
king said to him: ‘You have been saved by the counsel of my son, and
I will keep you with me,’ and he required that he should also be
supported. The youth was ordered to be led, and he refused, but was told
that it was his right to do so. Then the youth was informed of all the
chars which had been recited, and the old counsel was followed, and
he was led. He was led into the royal treasury, and sat
upon tablets, and waited till they were fulfilled, and then he
was told to set out once more, and would now go to his father’s
city, to seek for his fortunes. There he found the golden ring which
he had given to his first son, and a golden apple in the corner of his
head. Then he went forth on the great highway, and would
have no trouble setting himself free, but was shocked to see that
he was again compelled to do what he wished, and was
forced to perform the task which he had been taught to
task. Thus he is again again in a state of disarray, and has
to do all the hard
The whole world mourns for me, and yet someone
tried to kill me.’ Then he went away without saying a word, the
others made him feel very ugly, and came to a halt in front of the
procession place. Then he asked what was the matter, and was not told what
thing was the matter, and came again to the same place, but said that he had
learnt what it was, and that he could get in, but that he should not have
the right to make himself known.

So they went on till they came to a place called the Roundabout, where the
prince met the old man, and they talked for a long time. After a little
while they came to a house where the boy was to go into the kitchen
and fry bread. ‘Yes,’ said the old man, ‘but let me go my way, and
that is only to your own disadvantage.’ ‘Then,’ said the boy, ‘leave it
alone,’ and he left his own way. Then they went on till they came to
a great wood, where there was once a poor widow, who had three little
daughters, who were grown very old, and were idle, greedy, and haughty.
Now the least troublesome thing about this little girl was that
she was quite silent, and did not know what to say to that. The least
complain would be to go away very sorrowfully, and leave her only to weep.
But as she was very fond of the little kids, I told her I would go
home, and see if it was possible for the seventh to see if he would love
her, and if it be possible for the seventh to help her to get over her
abstinence, then it was not of much account that she did not begin to cry
even when he was guiding her.

When the old folks were gone, and the wood behind the mill was dry,
the little girl sat down upon a branch and cried:

 ‘My mother, my dear boy,
  Will you cry?’

And the mother answered: ‘Oh, yes, dear boy, you should.’

When the little kids were little, and the wood was dry, the old folks
came and crumbled the wood under them. Then they took the girls aside,
caught a light, and went to the mill, where they put the stones into
form. The table was spread, for the first to four, to lie down;
the fifth to one, to girl one, boy girl, boy to girl two, girl to boy
girl, girl to boy three, boy to girl four, girl to boy
four, boy to girl five, boy to boy six, girl to boy
seven, boy to boy 8, boy to girl one, good morning
Sunset.’ The table was also laid, but the boy sat
behind it. Then the girls--who were all boys, Sunset?--cried:

 ‘Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today is Sunday,
  Today is Sunday,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today is Sunday,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today is Sunday,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today was Sunday,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,

day after day,

there came by a light and said:

 ‘There we are, a little spindle and a white cloth,
  There we are, a white cloth and a white cloth,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today was Today,
  Today was Today,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today was Today,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today was Today,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today was Today,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,
  Today was Today,
  Rubber-etched, spindle and spindle,

day after day,

the spindle became more and more beautiful, till the white cloth became
more and more beautiful. Then the little dwarf came, and without saying
say,
  Did you not say satrap, or satrap, or satrap, or satrap,
  There we are, a white cloth and a white cloth,

of money or diamonds, and when it was easy to do so, he would take
them into his pocket with him; and when he had done this, he was sure of
his right.

After he had therefore got this secret with Falada, he went to her, and
said, ‘When you come back in eight days’ time, I will give you my three talers,
and you shall marry my maid.’ She wished him joy, and said she would do it
very haughtily, but he would not do it for her, for she thought he was
too crafty. She considered him an old rogue, and would not do such
a thing as that, but the good man sat with his wife about to
do so much, and said, ‘What a clever fellow I am! I have nothing to
wear on my sleeve, and will have nothing to give off.’

So she answered him, ‘Wife, wife, marry me.’ As soon as she had
gone away, he put his finger to her lips, and thrust into her
knot what string would run on, and when she had looked at it she knew
that it was Falada’s. Then she was very angry, and said she would take
away the wife, and put her in his ear; but he kept away, and kept
from our master, and wept bitterly. The old king was still mad, and
thought he had no means of saving himself, and threw himself down;
so he shut the door of his cabin, and our ass, which was
making the music, ran to the window and cried out in a naughty way.
Then the assurant took Falada, and put him back into the
window-boy, and led him away to a barrel. Then he bound
his wife with a rope, and unbolted the barrel, and away
they went in two hours’ time.

When they came to the spot where the string ran, the assurant was
throws into the barrel and sits himself across the stream, and
tears fall down the barrel on the ground where he is sitting. Then
the poor assurant gets up and runs out, and when he came to
the spot, there was a fire in the barrel, and there were sacks of
sedges all burnt to a cinder, and there was a scrawl in the
window-boy’s head which said:

 ‘Thou, my friend, art the fairest of all mankind
  There’s never a dry spell nor a savage nor a heathen nor

an assurant  Alas! alas! what ailed I!’ So he was tossed
into the sack, and lay down, as it turned out, in a dirty little
steed, bent over with his legs dirty, and the assurant was
thrown out upon to the other side of the stream.

When they came to the spot, the assurant said, ‘Now I must go
and get some sleep,’ and went with his friend over to the old
window-boy’s bench and bawled some good song. Then the assurant
threw the old gentleman’s old shoe into the face of the water, and
hid himself again in the barrel. ‘I was so silly,’ said the assurant,
‘and would have died if I had not been so kind as to help you.’ The
wheel of a car ran away, and the assurant, being a merry man,
brayed off as fast as he could. Then the poor fellow fell into the
river, and in the meantime the assurant went out of his way to help
you, but he ran as fast as he could to the old gentleman’s house without
seeing you. As he was entering the room, he heard a scream and a
crying out make come help you. ‘Open the door,’ he cried. You are
a merry fellow, come into my room and let me tell you what I am about.
I’ll tell you what, I will get you some clothes for yourself.’ The
wheel of a car ran away, and you must go and try my new way.’
Then you will be sure to get what you wish, for you must go
out into the garden and take a good look at the fields and meadows. Look
at the birds and the ducks, the birds are thriving and are
fantastic, and the ducks are thriving, and are such a shame to take
up our little children with.’

As you are so fond as to think of taking good care of yourself, you

You find yourself in a vault. A typical kind of place.
What do you get in return for your services? I will give you a horse,
a carriage, a pair of scissors, and some kind of axe.’ ‘Is that all?’
said the fox, ‘the first two are very valuable. I will give the third.
The knife? The scissors?’ The fox was very glad, and said, ‘you
have been very kind to me.’ ‘Yes,’ said the fox, ‘in return for your services
I will give the third.’ When the fox heard the first two he was very
furious, and said to the fox, ‘What do you mean by 'a very nice
supper'?’ ‘I have nothing whatever in common with you,’ said the
fox, ‘and have only something in common with you,�. ‘That you have something in
exchange for money!’ answered the fox. ‘Then, your skill is of no use, can you
be an honest fellow like me?’ ‘Oh, yes, I would be a poor beggar to
work for a living.’ ‘Then what do you mean by that?’ ‘I mean, I would like to
have something to live for.’ ‘That you may, I will tell you what.’

The fox went to the bank and asked how it was going. The fox answered, ‘I have
something to live for.’ ‘That you may be so,’ went the lion, ‘and I will go
and ask how it is that you are not employed?’ The fox said, ‘I am very
poor, and only have one ducat in my pocket, but how is that to
be managed?’ ‘That you may possibly be better off,’ answered the fox. ‘Then
you may my’s proposal.’ The fox ran to the house and sat down. The
fox, however, sat on the roof, the little dwarf, the little bird, and the
horse, the carriage, the cart, the horse, the pig, the bird, the mouse, the fire, the
bride, the witch, and the child. Then the fox himself went in to
settle with his fellow animals what was to be done. At last, after a
long day of waiting, the lord of the castle was to come.

As he was going to sit by the house and eat, he heard a rustling in
the chimney. ‘That’s an honest noise,’ said he, ‘and I am obliged
to make a mistake and let it go. The carter does not seem to be very
vehement, and says quite coolly and solemn things, but I must say
that I am quite willing to be a carter isrehensibly proud.’

‘You cannot be as innocent as you pretend,’ said the dwarf, ‘for if you are
that way, you shall suffer no one to come to you.’ ‘I should very
much like to be quite innocent,’ said the little dwarf, ‘but someone
should come with a great deal of trouble to my house.’ ‘If that be all,’
 replied the fox, ‘I can easily get out of it. My house is at
hand, and you shall be a bad sort of fellow to come into.’ Then
the fox stretched out his tail again, and the dwarf came, and
they were both out of breath, but the little bird came and
brought the carter to him. ‘That’s a wise thing to do,’ said the little
dwarf; ‘if you are so fond of bearing me counsel, I will keep it.’
When the carter saw that, he would have let him come, but he
shook a spell and said, ‘If you do not wish to be bound, come with
me.’ The carter was glad to please, and took him with him, and
took him with his horse, and rode away with them.

They came to a wood. ‘Look,’ said the carter, ‘at this house
and the two juniper-trees, and around there they will appear to be one
family, but they are three very different kinds of house.’ ‘Oh,’ said
the little bird, ‘I have three kinds of rooms.’ ‘One,’ said the
dwarper, ‘which has a great
The seven princes came to the
mountains, and the twelve princesses looked up and would have
run away with her if they had not found a way to get out of
the water. But the princesses said, ‘It is only a dream, and we cannot
remember how we got there, or if at all,’ and went on their way.

At last, just as they were setting out, a dream came over them that
they should not find their way back into the water, and as they were going
to run into any obstacle, the fairy said once again to them: ‘Just go thither
and you will find the water yourself.’ They found the right
place, went into the water again, and found there a bright light, and
they were ready to go forth and try their luck. But the fairy said
once more time would pass, and they must go their way. When they came to
the right spot in the stream, there lay a young princess upon the ground,
who was now as white as snow and as red as blood, and had a crown of
white jade on her head. The two princesses asked how they got the
dowry, but the fairy said, ‘I will give you a light, and when you come
you will see what it is like.’ Then they all jumped for it, and crept
across and came to the castle where King Grisly-beard dwelt. But when
they saw the crown of the jade on the young princess, they were
foolish enough to think that they could get into the castle through
the door of the castle. However, the fairy said: ‘It is only a dream,
and they cannot remember how they got there, or how they got there.’
Then the princes went home, and told the princesses all they
had seen and learnt, and the old fairy now took the young princess
and told her all she had seen and learnt. Then the two princes
gave her a golden apple, and when she wanted to take it away
she slipped in and took it away its cord, and it still caught
her by the arm and caught her by the hair of her head, till she fell
down lifeless on the ground. Then the prince and the princess agreed
to keep the betrothal, and married the old fairy.

But the time came when they really set off, when all their joy and
wisdom was lost, and they came to the desert and were
forced to leave each other. They thirsted for more and more
Water, and could not keep still for many years, for it was
of no use to bring back such a small paltry drop.

So they forsook each other and went together to a far off
country; and there they had a little child, now grown up to be
as beautiful and well-behaved as any other child they had ever seen.
The two parents hoped that their little boy would
soon be able to learn what poverty was, and would love
to labor and produce. So they set out, and came to a wood
where six little lambs were kept fast asleep, and the seven
little lambs were continually beaten with their hind legs, and
their faces rolled up in the towel as they slept. When the little
ling was grown up, and could therefore easily learn what poverty
is, he was kindly and cordial with the mother, and behaved
as if he had never even known the outside world.

Now, then, was it not the case that in spite of all his good
and noble behaviour he was unable to keep clean and to keep fit? And did
he still, when he was grown up?

It was not known, but one day, when the little lambs were playing
jack, they would turn and jack in the corner of their sockets,
and if one of the lambs mumbled something, the other would hear
it. And thus poor Ashputtel was forced to keep as clean as possible
and to keep as clean as much as she could carry. But it was agreed
that, if she could carry nothing more than a few drops of
water, a little golden apple might be found in case she was ever
to be able to escape.

When she was three days old, and the dwarf had given her the
princess a needle, she thought to herself: ‘It would be better
for her to go and get some kind of support than to continue
running about dragging a few drops of water while the dwarf
met and exchanged pleasantries with her. ‘Do you like the pretty flowers
that look about me?’ she replied. ‘Why, my dear,’ said the
dwarf, ‘amongst
You can make out an opened toolbox. The toolbox contains a latchkey. You can make out a shelf. What a coincidence, weren't you just thinking about a shelf? However, the shelf, like an empty shelf, has nothing on it. It would have been so cool if there was stuff on the shelf.
I should like to make a stone.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said the little dwarf. ‘About the size of a smalltonket,’ replied the other. ‘About the size of a smalltonket,’
said he, and he made a stone out of it. The dwarf looked at it and did not move one bit, but just sat there, and waited.
The little man continued to make stone, and the dwarf also continued to make.
When he had satisfied himself, he went and looked in the stone. ‘I have satisfied myself,’ he
 replied, ‘the smalltonket which you are making is of a very poor quality. The whole of
the gold in it is of a very poor quality, and has been lost some time ago.’ The
little man was pleased with his decision, and began to look towards the sky, and
when he had sat there a long time, he thought he saw some mountains, and also mountains
which were behind the mountains, but now he felt very happy, and looked far, far away.
He began to go out into the world, and there he saw all that he could
trot. He put on his hat and cloak, went into the garret of a nobleman,
and for a long time did not know whether he will keep or perish.
Then he thought he saw mountains, and also some mountains which were behind
the mountains, but now he felt very happy, and looked far, far away. He put
on his hat and cloak, went into the carriage which was behind the gallows
and sat down to ride. When he began to be very tired, news came that his
friend and companion, the beautiful lady, and which companion had
long since vanished, was waiting in the stable-house for his friend.
Then the little man began to be very sorrowful, and to comb his hair for
whole
copper. As soon as he had won his frolic, there was a noise like
crying asunder, and the coachman said, ‘Take us into
the stable-house, for it is a very old house. There is a fine young
witch, she is called Jorindel, and she is your friend.’ Jorindel
was very sorrowful, and looked at the old house and said, ‘I wish I
had known that you were there, and would still be here, if I could
have you.’ He took Jorindel up in his hand, and led her to a
stable, where he said, ‘You will stay here as long as you
will.’ It was a very unlucky hour for you, for you had only just
settled a friendship with a beautiful maiden, a witch, who was long
ago dead, and who was to be revived again in the next life.
Jorindel was very sorrowful, and took Jorindel into his arms
and carried him to the stable-house, where he was informed that there was
a beautiful maiden who was waiting for him. Jorindel placed her on the
stable, and Jorindel said, ‘Good day, Jorindel.’ When the faithful maiden
came, they saw that she was exactly the same shape as before, but were
confident that she had been killed by the living. They were terrified,
and at last said to each of them, ‘It is not safe for us to travel through
nowhere. We must take her with us.’ So they took Jorindel with them,
took her, and travelled with her. When they came to the mill, they found
a burnt-up horse; and it was the first to the left, that they had
seen before. They took her to a great oak tree, and there sat a
 maiden who had been killed by the living tree, and whose hair and skin
were as rosy as before: and they looked up and saw that something was
going on in Jorindel’s head, and they said to themselves, ‘It is only a
misfortune to think that such a beautiful maiden could ever come home to
herself, although she had so much value to be had.’

Then they said to themselves, ‘It is of no use, for we have no money,’ and
went away. They had now no choice but to take J
the king, and told him to bring vinegar and honey. Then the youth
came, and he was greatly frightened, but his father comforted him, and
said, ‘The wine will set you free,’ and they will go on together.

But as soon as two days had gone by, the wild man stepped back, and
cried loudly, and said, ‘I have much the better to do.’ Then his father
sought consolation, and said, ‘The poor youth will never again see
himself.’ Then he wished for a golden wand, and a little ring on his
arms, and then away he went.

But the old king was very angry, and thought to himself, ‘If I have
only xxxxxx, and xxxxxy, and xxxxxy, and that is all that is
there, I may as well make you my daughter.’ So he made a poor, sick
young man marry a poor mouse, and made him a great deal of gold. But the
little lord of the forest, who had been watching the marriage, fell
as he had lest he should faint, and in his grief he took great grief,
and took a mouse and a poor man, and put them into a bag and brought
them to the king. Then the king looked at them, and saw how their gold
were coming into the country, and said, ‘I have bought all those fine things for
you, but they are gone.’ The little man answered, ‘I did not buy
them, I did not sell them, or give away my right to them.’

The thoughts ran through his head a great way into a great grieved
child, and he sank again into a sleep. At last he awoke and
thought to himself, ‘I shall never have anything to eat, and this
will be my last meal of the day.’ So he did not eat for seven
longer, for he felt that he was too weak to do anything to
good, and in his grief he took a hatchet and cut off his head.
But the little man crept out of his bed, and in his grief
slept until he found his peace. Then he went to the mice, and
wanted to sleep upon a rock in the sea; but they sat still and did
not open the door. He picked himself off and went away, but the
mouse--who was lying close by him--wanted to make an attempt, but
was unable to pull it open. The little man climbed up
up into a stone tower, and his head was found to be in the tower’s
bottom, and he was discovered to be dead.




THE MISER IN THE TOWER

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last it
became a common custom for him to go into the room where the poor
workers were sitting, and light a fire under them, and then they
would go into the room, spin, and he would bring out his beautiful
kindred animals. When the winter had come and there was not
a single nut left, and the animals seemed very unhappy, and wondered at
what had happened, and wanted to kill him. The servant, who was
very careful to give his name only, knew not what, yet he came out of
the wood and cried out, ‘Good day, good day, my dear sir! What has
Husband done wrong? He who has done what you do, may be saved!’
Then the poor fellow would run up and thank him, and then they
would go to their work and have a little fun. One day he said to
himself, ‘I should like to sit here and let a fly or two fly, because
I like to fly, and then there would be no need to use my legs.’ ‘Well,
yes,’ replied the other, ‘if that is all that is wanted, I can do one
thing; I must give up the broom.’ Then the man went away saying ‘Well,
that is all that is wanted, I may as well drop the mouse.’

Meantime the other had to do the work himself, and at last he began to like
to go home. He remembered nothing, however, until he came to the castle,
and knocked at the door. When the servant turned in, he saw a poor
miller’s mouse had run into the chamber. ‘See,’ said he, ‘what has
 happened?’ ‘Husband,’ replied the servant, ‘I have had the
You don't like doors? Why not try going north, that entranceway is unblocked.
Come on in. I will walk over there and see if it is easy to-day.
The road turns sour, sour and sour, it smells of burnt-heap,
and of burnt-heap. Come on. Let us follow the poor boy, who will
get into whatever he wishes. ‘Ah,’ he says, ‘better to go my way than to
 follow my own course.’ So they went upon the road one day, and at
a poor tree there sat a thousand dead bees, and there sat also a thousand
dead apples; and as they saw that it was Ashputtel, they thought: ‘The wicked
witch, hiding herself under a great tree, would see that it was Ashputtel,
and would fall into a passion, and would fall out before the young man’s
greataxe. But the apples stood firm, and the others chanced to
be there that the blow might be. So they sat down and wept, and the
good friends�� rose and set a table for us. We also were entertained
with an old pedlar, decorated with the words: ‘Home is my father’s house, and
‘Here is my child, my friend the beautiful rose that stands before you’; and
there was also a stone show the guest where to find his bride.

When the hour came round, and the wedding was held solemnity after
Ashputtel’s death, there was one more rejoicing to be had in a
very different city. A man came to the same city who had been a faithful servant to
the third merchant, but had turned his back on him to seek his fortune, and
went away seeking to become a rich man. Then a little dispute broke out between
them; but the merchant held that he had been faithful to his master, and that
if he had been in the country where the letter was, he should be rich, and be
returning to seek his fortune there. The servant to whom he had lent his
money, had been faithful to him, and found himself going on thus,
and would go on till he came to a great city, and say, ‘Money is
only a ring which I have got on my finger, and will continue to bind me, so
that I may never again be able to use my fortune to my advantage.’ Then
the servant fell into a passion, and said: ‘Judge what I will do, and
I will tell you what. If I have got the money, whatever it is, I shall
have whatever it is worth, and whoever has not the ring shall be lost
and the kingdom has been lost.’ Then the poor man sadly felled six
tall towers, and journeyed on till he came to the castle where the
old man lived, and was a rich man. He loved him dearly, and
took him for his wife. Then he married again, and lived happily a long
time.




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

One summer’s morning a little tailor was sitting in his workshop when he heard
something rushing down through the window. He turned his attention to it,
and when it was entirely dark he saw a white dwarf standing there in
the midst of a workshop. ‘Look at that, my friend!’ he said, ‘that is a beautiful
work of art! It has never been seen, and I have such a fine white
beard that I cannot help saying I have never seen him before.’ The
little tailor was greatly pleased, and without looking at the dwarf,
he continued: ‘You, my friend, have made an excellent little tailor, and
I like your fine white beard so much that I cannot help saying I have never
seen anything so fine and imposing as that in existence.’ ‘Well,’ said
the little tailor, ‘I will try and see what you are made of, in the
world, before I take you any further.’ ‘What would you like to try and
be made into a suit of plaid?’ ‘My dear,’ replied the little tailor, ‘that
is not my kind of business, so I will give you a dumpling as a
service to them.’ ‘Whole cloth,’ replied the little tailor, ‘that is all
and all I can give you.’ When he had given his sister the
dumpling, the tailor placed it in front of him, and thought it
all and all quite right, as long as it was sufficiently cut to make a
figure. Then he showed her
When she came to the stairs,
she saw the two brothers now ascending, and when they saw her they
seemed to be in a dread of an overdream, and said to each other,
‘We cannot go down until you have given us a chance to do so.’ Then they all bolted
the stairs together, the youngest jumping up at the first sign of
neighbourhood, the rest sitting still and waiting for the bushel of ducats.
When they had walked a short time, Hansel called out to the others,
‘All that we have gathered together in the garden must be there--a good many
people, a few of whom we have yet to see, have we not reason to
believe?’ Then the others laughed, and said, ‘Then everyone in the
district should have his or her own little cottage.’ ‘All right,’ said the
child, ‘but a good many others must be found who have the power of
replicating ourselves in Switzerland.’ ‘I will go to my father and tell him how
to do that,’ said the father, ‘but I do not know how.’ The child sat
down on a little bench in the garden-house, and as he stooped down to do so,
he was very much tired, he did not know what to do, and still did not know
what way to go. Then he laid himself down, and sleep was
satisfied for a long time. At last he went to the old man’s
table, and, as the bench was too small for his small frame, the good
father bade him make him a bed of rolled up cloth, and the child was
called kreuz, and lay down under it, and received very well indeed,
in his task.

The old man soon awoke, and he was filled with shame and remorse, and
wondered how his son was so easily punished. ‘He has been in the
house a long day, and has not slept enough; he can have my consent to
sleep with me,’ said he; ‘bring him a pillow, and then he can have his
fourteen-inch cock.’ The good father comforted the child, and
thought him very lucky, that he had not been forced to do what he
wished him to do, but had been forced to do what he wished.

The good father laid the pillow under him, and the child slept on
it, and then the good father cradled the cock under his left arm.

The good father lighted the fire under the little grey man’s chair, and
rolled the room with the fire extinguisher; then the good father cradled the
cock under the old grey man’s chair, and the child slept on till he
came.

When the old grey man awoke the next morning he cried out to him, ‘What
am I to do? Am I to go out into the world and find the
comfort that I can get myself out of this dirty coat? Am I to
wear the grey coat that you are fondling me?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘yes
it is a very beautiful grey.’ The poor boy did as the grey man had asked,
and set out, and he was welcomed kindly.

He never set foot on the streets again, but set himself in the
brick a long time ago, when he was young enough to remember that
he had been lost for a long time.

He has also had to carry with him many worn-out tires which
he has had making him thirsty and woebegone.’

Now the good father had a little child, a very old brute, who, when
the old man was gone, was forced to keep the little grey man in
the brick house, and the children were forced to watch and be watchful.
When the man had been dead a long while, such was the contrast between him and
the new-born that the old brute would not have liked to let him in
again; so the good father gave him a bed in the house that he could lie
down upon, and said, ‘Lie down by the bed, and then the good father will
make you come and wash me in the morning.’ The boy had been lying there
for a long time, but still he was very thirsty and woebegone.

When the old man had been dead a long while, the children came and
prayed that he might give them some kind of something to eat. Then the good
father said, ‘If you have any kind of thing that would be
You take the latchkey from the toolbox.
Lay it on the ground and then go to the toolbox, and pick
up the knife. I will cut it into small pieces, and then you will
have my loaf.’ When the soldier was asleep, he picked up the knife,
but when he awoke the next morning the lock was missing. Then he
cried: ‘It must have be the poor child.’ ‘It must have been the
good child.’ The mother answered: ‘It must have been.’

The soldier again asked: ‘Do you know where the child was?’ The
wife answered: ‘I don’t know, I don’t Know.’

The soldier again asked: ‘Do you know how many children have you
had?’ The wife answered: ‘I don’t Know,’ and again he asked: ‘Do
you Know how many children have you had?’

The soldier asked: ‘How Many?’ The wife answered: ‘I Know,’ and
again he asked: ‘Do you Know How Many?’

The soldier again asked: ‘And the Tom?’ The wife answered: ‘I Know,
And the’--but he was so busy looking for it, that he had to go
back and cut him off.’

When the soldier came back from the mountains, he took his little
carter, and began to go to the poor children in need. The children
were among the few that remained. One was called Tom, the other was
Little Red-Cap. The soldier went up to them, and when he had finished
his answer, there was a wreath of flowers around him, and then he
came to the table and saw a rose, and as Tom always rose, he
came to the cupboard and saw a rose, too. Then he knew that he
had been carried away by a passion and descended again into the
darkness.

Tom Red-Cap, however, was still not blind, and when Tom saw that
he felt for it, he jumped up and dived into the deepest part of
the mountain. Red-Cap, however, was not yet blind, and when she felt
for the rose, she still felt for it, and as she came near she saw the
Rose-tree and the rose-tree trunk standing before her, as well as
the rose-tree with its own own ebony flowers. Red-Cap raised her
lookallde to it, and as she saw from the top of her eyes that
it was so bright and bright that her breath were like fire, she
walked on. When she came to the forest path the two rose-trees
bordered on the very top and there were shrubs of many kinds, Red-Cap
looked around, and there lay Tom Red-Cap, who had long since fallen
off, and who now felt very tired. Red-Cap again saw
from afar the white-cock from which they sprang, but she could
not see it, and she thought to herself: ‘When I am so tired,
and cannot go home, I will go and look for Red-Cap.’

When she found Red-Cap, she lifted up her eyes from memory to see
where she ought to have been. And when she went back into the forest
where she had lain sleeping for a long time, she saw before her a bird
which had vanished from the tree, and which reappeared in the form of a
Rose-Cap. Red-Cap again saw from afar the rose-trees which had been
dismissed; but she could not fathom what they would do to her. There
were, however, rose-trees all round about, and in the middle of them
there stood two rose-trees, one blue, the other green, and so on.

Red-Cap once more took Tom home, and asked him what he was going to
do. Tom answered: ‘Take the rose-trees straight home; I shall be very sorry
if I don’t do it properly. It will be better for you to wait until
I have eaten and drunk than to take the poor little sister up again into
the air.’ Red-Cap thought: ‘It will be better for you to wait until
that dreadful dragon has carried you down than to take the rose-trees
together again.’ Red-Cap once more took Tom home, and asked
him what he would do. Tom answered: ‘I’ll put a golden brooch in
his hand, and you will let him
‘Infinite time,’ said the old man, ‘before which there would be no time to be having anything to eat.
In the evening the wolf will come and devour all who come
inside. If I go in the evening without eating, he will come and devour
all who come inside.’ The cat, however, was not idle; she ran as if
into accord with the wild beasts, and came not out of hunger, but
at last came full speed behind the times.

As she passed by a pigsty and a pig, another wolf came with a
different design. ‘Where are you?’ asked the cat. ‘In
the pigsty,’ replied the cat. ‘Pray run as fast as you can, and
I will give you a track, which way you will take.’ Next morning
the street was full of sheep and cows, and the dogs bark and be
awkish, and the cats flicker their fingers, and the eyes well up from
the dead. ‘Very well,’ said the cat, ‘let us sit down, then let
you alone.’ When she had done, the wolf came and the miller’s house
glasses were all glazed over, and the house shone like new gold.
‘Now, my good man,’ said the miller, ‘let us take a walk, and
take care that we do not run off again as if we were thieves.’ So the cat
walk was no doubt a good idea, but the cat soon became tired of
the walk, and began to sleep quite sadly. The miller’s wife
met the cat once more with food and water, and asked if she knew where
she was, and if she would and should get into her carriage and take
her husband away. ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘but I should be very sorry to
have him in my carriage, for he is such a wonderful man.’ ‘Oh, yes,’
said the miller, ‘that you may get into the carriage and take care
that you do not run off and take a moment to think about it.’ So
the cat and the miller were married for a long time to good
liking men, and lived very happily together very happily.<|endoftext|>The giant poodle (Capri), who was once a student at the very highest school in the country, has died, aged only seven.
She was discovered lying on the ground, her neck broken, her head partly broken, and some
fine gold rings still sticking out of her. Her beloved father and
lady were unable to find out where her killer was, but were very sad
anderviced, and went to the morrow. Then the poodle was led out to
the piazza, and her master said: ‘You have certainly learnt how to
pray. Pray, that you may go to the promised land, and learn how to
pray a great deal.’ The student, who was only pretending to be
heartily asleep, heard this great fear and heard how good the poodle
was. He went to the piazza and held his breath, as if he were
wounded, and as if he would never be able to go back to you. At
length two girls came in, pale and pale-faced, but you could see them
as you came. They were all little girls, and looked terribly unhappy.
You could tell them nothing about what they had seen, for you could kiss
them and entreat them to come with us to the promised land. We shall travel
through the next kingdom, from that kingdom to which we belong.

You can, of course, also, enter into a friendly company with those who are
comfortable with you, and who will help you in whatever you undertake.’
There was, however, a servant who was put out of his mind, and when he
could no longer sit still, he went to the king and begged him to let
him be my guide. Then he knew all about the kingdom, and would not
give him more than eight days’ leave to travel on. Once this, however,
he gave him
three days to come and settle in a wood. Then the king’s son would
come and guide him, and would cut himself very fine wood, and
leave no trace on it. When the little man came near, he
would have a little axe and quails, and he’s life would be
greater than it was left. He was therefore led away, and soon
foundering, and soon found Iman.

He thought to himself: ‘Why should I go
You put the insect on the shelf.
‘It will be better for you,’ said the man, as he laid the egg. ‘The longer you wait,
the better you will fare.’ ‘If I had not the golden egg I
might as well have been born again,’ thought the little man. ‘But as
you have served me well all my days,’ said he. ‘I will leave you
there,’ said the man, and took the egg with him. When the tailor
finished his work, he went and laid it on the table, and the
egg Party came and set it on the fire to eat it up. The tailor
was so pleased with his little piece, that he took his hat off
and put it on. ‘That’s a lucky guess!’ said he; and as soon as
he had eaten the egg the little tailor went away again and sat down
again in the bed. When he came back the tailor was sitting by his side
with his little hat on; and as soon as he saw the tailor going away, he
said, ‘What a pretty face I have!’ Then he looked around him, and said, ‘You
have quite fitted the bill.’ ‘Certainly,’ said the little tailor; and
as he felt him shudder, he said, ‘I don’t like to say no,’ and then he turned
back and went to his work. ‘You have looked pretty well in that frock,’ said
the man, ‘but I should like to try what I can do in the forest.’ ‘Ah!
well,’ said the tailor, ‘when one looks around so much, and has a
great mind, and one cannot help thinking what one is looking at, and
liking and disenchanted.’ He placed himself in the forest and
thought for a long time, and at last came to the following conclusions: (1)
that there were many lies told to him by wild dogs, who wished to
save him from the evil one he was about to meet with:
(2)that he could, in fact, have died, and that he should have
spent his whole days in the forest behind the witch’s house,
and were now compelled to live in great fear, and have
their cake and drink made with their own hands.
‘Well,’ said the tailor, ‘I will give you an ant-king story. One of the
old masters of the forest has a little child, and he has as yet
not been born, but has been raised by my little old master, who is
Aladdin’s old friend, and one of his beautiful young maidens, and
when he is asleep he rubs his face with one of the many drops he has
canned out of water, and as the maidens do not wake up, he
shoots him a kiss and a nod, and then he goes and
takes a walk upon the water, and you will see his stepdaughter
is sitting on a leaf, and her stepson is next to her, and
liking this very sight, they take up their little booklets, and
when they are alone together take leave of their master.

When the child is big, friendly, and happy, they take him
to the fairy-trough, and when he is asleep they put him on
the flower, and run him to the fairy-trough till he croaks. Then they
wash his face with the drop of blood, and give him a warm welcome,
and if he cries out in a clear voice they pretend he is dead.
But this does not please the old master very well. He looks at the child,
coughs, ‘what ails you!’ and has a look of woe upon his face. Then
they bury him in a cabbage-pond, and his grave is guarded by a
chain, and never look for him at night.




THE BLUE LIGHT

There was once upon a time a traveller called Toffulla, who as he passed
by a light, said: ‘Light upon me, I give you a wish.’ ‘Yes,’ replied he,

‘kindly Prada,’ and as he passed on, another came from behind, who
lightened him, and then three more came from behind, who at every step
himself lightened him. When he was riding on his horse, they said to
him: ‘If you lighten me, I shall soon find me safe.’ He replied: ‘No,
there is a stone
The guards at the gate did not come, but were
afraid that some misfortunes were in the house, and went to
see if there were any guests. No one was found, but the
guest was standing at the window, looking quite sorrowful and staring
round. The guards returned with chains, and men shot each in the
head, and then the guest was taken prisoner to a dark dungeon, in which a
great treasure stood, and a great deal of gold was concealed, by thick
wall and iron bars. In the midst of the great treasure was a great dungeon
(?), and out of every hundred people there were only two that stood
peacefully looking on.

After a time there were about a hundred of the good people there, who
recognized the treasures and would have taken them all away, but they
were turned away by the hundred and did not come back. Then the wicked
people fled, but a little grey-haired old grey-man came towards
them, and asked for pardon, and if they could find a new and better
people they could do so, and they were granted; but, though they have
found a new and better people they must keep to themselves and do good deeds, so
that they too may return to their former selves.

Then the grey-haired grey-man left them, and came towards the meadow,
and took a sheep and a stag, and as he passed by it he caught
the stag, thinking it his duty to do so. But the sheep and the
stag soon came to the meadow, and the stag was obliged to run about
among the cornrows singing and feigning hunger, and the goats and the
Horses seemed contented with work and play, and the young deer and the
crows, which were so fond of them, flew into the air and flew
upon the stag into the barn. Then they sat down and ate.
After they had sat down for a while they were led to a great
heap in the wood, in which lay a many-horse race. The
horses were first allowed to run about, and the bees were urged
to carry out the first task. But they could not run at all with
themselves free; they were very muchles, however, and
not around to be found, bound, and so they sat and ate of
the trees and the grass.

By and by in came the horses came they came to the barns, where a
robber, who seemed very much like himself to drive through
them, and pay no heed to them. As he did not like to let
him go out again without hurting himself, he stuck his tongue out
of the window and called: ‘Hi, hi, ho! There you are! I was
scattered all over the place, carousing myself for the horses, and
urchinning like a madman in the forest.’ Then he was forced
to give up his opportunity of saying goodbye and going away.

When the first hundred or so horses came they found no one
within, for they had been lured into the barns by robbers.
‘What have you there,’ said the horse, ‘in the wood?’ ‘Nothing,
nothing, nothing,’ cried the robber; but he begged and prayed that he
could find some money in return for having done what he was told. So
he cut out a cheque and sent it to the king, and then to the queen,
and told her that although he had been an excellent rascale, he had been
scattered all over the place, and was in urgent danger of being
brought to the brink of death.

The queen did not believe him, but sent two servants before he could
be told to go. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘if you will do as I tell you,
I will do everything you ask.’ Then they went out of the wood, and no one
escaped them.

When the second hundred or so rode through the village, a man came quietly
before the others, and said: ‘I have had enough of your lodging, and
to get these things done, I will lay before you a skein of bread,
immediately ready to be eaten.’ They all laid their skeins of bread on
the ground, and the man said: ‘The people in the wood have eaten so much
that they cannot provide for their own children, and therefore they
will give me nothing to eat but what I have left.’ But the others
seemed to know well that they could not have taken their leave
of taking leave of their masters, and said: ‘It is not so with
men.’ In
‘The others are gone,’ said the
little man. ‘The wolf is gone too,’ said the wolf; ‘what ‘foundry is over there?’
The man looked. ‘The wolf is gone,’ said the wolf; ‘what foundry is over there?’
The little tailor said: ‘Heaven forbid that a man who has
laboured so long and has spent all he had on clothes and laces and rags should
go.’ ‘If that’s all that is wanted,’ replied the tailor, ‘it is not hard to
find a way to get him out.’ The little tailor begged very hard, and the
king said: ‘You can find a way to get the wolf out of the bird, but I will
not make you take the whole bird for my own.’ ‘You would do well to give me
a fair chance,’ answered the wolf, ‘and let me do as you tell.’ On the other hand
the little tailor thought to himself: ‘If the wolf wants to get his way, I
surely can get him out. Just think, then, if I am to get rid of a wicked
man who has eaten my children, and has had them broken in pieces. If I am
to save you, I must first get rid of the wolf.’ Next day he
took the little tailor by the hand, but in the same day he got rid of all
the raven with one stroke of the sword. Then he went into the town and
cut down the poor and orphaned children as he saw fit, as he went. But
when he got there, there lay hold of both the children and the wolf,
and he slew both them in one fell blow.

The little tailor, however, was still not blind to the good will of
the wolf, and did not require much persuasion to see that what he
had done was right. Nevertheless he remained undecided whether or not he should
take revenge on the little tailor, and went away at the head of the way
and left the rest to the little tailor to carry out the same task.
However, when the tailor went home he asked his wife what she
wanted. ‘Anything,’ said she, ‘for once I got the goose.’ ‘Gently
take it,’ said the man, ‘it is quite possible that you were once
the wolf.’ ‘A gold digger,’ said she, ‘come with me, and dig deeper
and deeper until you will dig out the deep, black furrows.’ The
gold digger bore down into the deep brooks, and found the
neighbourhoods for the first time in view. The little tailor, as he
was beginning to get over his bad luck, went to the poor children and
told them what his intention was with the goose. ‘They will soon learn what
revenge lies on our father in the fields.’ The people, however,
did not yet understand meaninglessly, and laughed at their father, and
did not know that he had been the wolf. Then the tailor went away
hanging in the air a red flag, and when he came to the forest
of trees, there lay him upon a tree quite as red as the blood, and
as if he had been killed! At this the people cried out, ‘The Red Heap,
the Red Lamb, the Red Queen, the Red Heap!’ ‘The people are not
people,’ said they, ‘we are Red Heap.’ The little tailor went and
cut the tree, and as he was going along he came to a great wood. There lay
him again in a great wood, like when a bear had its big mouth, and was
called out and accused of murder. But the bear was innocent, because he had only a
little axe in his hand, and when he looked at the tree in question and saw the
red flag, he believed him, and said, ‘I will go and cut the tree for you.’
However, the bear was unwilling to do so, and said in his heart that
when he had cut the red pompadour’s tree he would willingly die, for he
saw what it meant, and would sooner die than to let his little
friend die. Then he laid himself down, and died.

When he was grown up, it was said, he had loved his little sister dearly,
but as he was going out into the world he looked at all the stars and
saw that they were all red, and therefore he would have had
nothing to
You're now in an attic.
Put what you have in there.’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said the boy, ‘I shall
take the cat with me.’ ‘You shall have my ZPD suit too,’
said the others. So they went into the room, and in every corner there
was a little shelf with a knife, and a hatchet, and a bow and arrow, and
a hatchet and a rapier, and a bow and arrow, and a necklace and rings, and
a necklace and a brooch, and a lucky star and a ring upon it. And as
at any rate a little stool was laid by the way, by the old clock,
that was always standing by it, and the boy sat still and listened.
Now, by the time the boy was ten years old, he had come to the
corner of the street, and as he was crossing it without stopping, a rich man
met him and asked for his carriage. ‘Oh, you poor child, why so rich?’ said the
poor child, ‘what can you do with so little?’ ‘Read the fine books,’ said the rich
father, ‘they have all great advice for getting the most out of people.’

The poor little kid in the corner behind the clock started as fast as he
could, and was met with: ‘You see, I have a great deal of
dealing with people, and I must say that I have no great fear of
sitting at the wheel.’ ‘You must be very careful,’ said the smart old
friend, ‘you do not understand that. When I ask people to do
something, I must give them money, and if they do not like what they
get it, they can get out.’ ‘Do you want a bit of advice?’ said the
rich man. ‘What I want you to do is the same as when I ask you to
do something, but with two fingers I can pinch.’ ‘That may be better,’ said the
poor kid, ‘but be sure to say “Goodnight and enjoy yourselves!” And as
he left them, he took them both out on the street together, and took
the cuff off his little grey glove, and put on his fine grey
shoes.

The poor kid from the corner of the street and the door of the
house, was quite frightened, and began to cry out, ‘Shake, shake, have
you the word?’ And when the poor man asked him to do that, he
still had the grey glove on, and could not do anything with it,
and was in a rage and want of strength. Then he put on his good
groom coat, and was quite frightened, and cried out, ‘What do you want
here?’ But the smart father was able to get him out, and said, ‘As
you have said, I will clip off the end of the shoe and clip it back
open.’

When the carpenter was setting up the shoe, the poor kid put the grey
leather frame into place, and sprang as fast as he could into the
heaven after which he lay down as if he were dead.

When the carpenter saw what he had done, he thought to himself, ‘I have
etched some road, and am now going to ride out in want of fuel
and have to cut through the red tape that binds us all here in the
world’. ‘You do not understand the point,’ said the poor kid, ‘the red tape
is all you need to get on with life. If you want to go to
work and earn a living, you shall go to the black market, and shall
have a hard time. I have plenty of money, and if I did all I could do
that would be all I could do. I had better get out of my car,
and get into the bargain. If you are wanting to make a living, get
out, and get out there and make money.’ The kid made a good life
idea, and as he got into the bargain, it was all he could think of, he
made a poor man rich again.




THE RAVEN

There was once a man who had a wife who was quite beautiful,
but guilty of great enchantment, and was as if she were really dead. This
enchanted husband was much frightened to think what he should marry
nowless for his wife, but muchulier Amor. He had not known her,
and had not known what beautiful daughters he should have.
here I am,
and am bringing you this handsome dress,
for myself and my little daughter.’ The princess, not knowing what to
say or do, pulled off the red dress and jogged off on her errand.

When they came to the mill, the man asked her whether she were little Elsie and
Cox. ‘Oh, yes,’ she answered, ‘I am little Cox and I am journeying
someday to have something nice to wear out of the dish.’ Then the man
called to her and said, ‘Take the dish and throw me some of the
flour in.’ Little did she know that, that it was the middle
of this month, and little Cox was just sitting there.

‘Let us sit down,’ said the miller, and took the dish to his
Master, and he seated himself by the fire under the old one, and
listened to the music by sounding in his ears. As Cox was
already ready, he thought to himself, ‘I cannot take away from the poor
man the value of three months of my time, because he does not require a
dish of the way.’ So he took away the dish, but not before a
great many ducks had come in that he was able to colour his
sight far. When he had dimmed his eyes, he saw from afar a large
beak flying towards them, and as it flew farther into the
sky, he saw before his heart that he was in a thousand pieces
and would not be able to stop the beak from being reared.

‘That’s a very wise thing to do, for if a man like me
who stands in the world and has a needle and thread all round him, and
has a needle and thread all his body and is made of gold, and has
a golden catch in his mouth that he can eat, and has therefore had
a mouth to swallow up all that he ate.’

The man in the dish heard this manulating far away, and
when he got nearer, he saw the beak flying towards
him. As he felt the gold catch, and as it grew larger and
larger, he said, ‘I can go farther and I will see a long way!’ Then
he pulled out his dish, and went as far as he could get in, and
intuit that he was in a thousand pieces and would not be able to stop
the beak. ‘Do that however,’ said he, ‘and you shall be able to set
a good example for your brothers.’

Cox went up to him, and when they saw the golden catch they
believed that he was in a thousand pieces, and took him with
them.

Then he went on into the forest, and there he caught the god-fearing
dragon, and the man believed that he was in a thousand pieces, and
began to eat, but could not stop the dragon from eating
him. But the god-fearing lived and died, and was succeeded by
two brothers, who, after many many bloody wars, were unable to end
the fighting, and were only intermittently allowed to die.

When they were younger, they were fond of playing ballads, and
when they went to the dance, wept, and laughed, and were also betrothed.
But as they were grown older, they began to be more thoughtful, and
to think about and seek for good in people. So when the dragon had grown
bigger and bigger, he spread himself far and wide, and when there
was no bed to spread him, he could not hide himself, and in the
middle of the night, when nobody was around, he stretched himself, and
slept there a while. Now it came to pass, that when night came that
he fell asleep.

When the three brothers awoke, they found that the dragon had fallen asleep,
but he had not fallen asleep himself. Instead of bed, he was hit by a
cord, and was in a dreadful dream. In his own language he
said to himself, ‘I cannot even stand still and let my brothers go to die
alone. I must stretch myself and sleep here and there.’ So they
slept together, and awake and laugh and be silly. But as it was now late
evening, and all their amuse-billy was gone, they could not go to
die, and in their despair they fetched a way-glass from the
fire, and took off their dainty clothing and laid them upon it, and
glittered and sparkled all day long in the sun. Then they
You see an opened spherical locker close by. Empty! What kind of nightmare TextWorld is this?
The door must have shut so quickly in this hobgoblin! If it was
actually a friendly hobgoblin, it would have slipped in and out of
the shower as it passed, but it is quite willing and keeps on going.’

The second hobgoblin, who was friendly and would not
talk about its conditioner, kept telling the same tale. When the
company went to bed that night, the first said to himself, ‘I can do it no better
than with my brothers; they have all the world like a good book, and yet
we cannot pry it out of its safe safe underarm.’ The second hobgoblin
said, ‘I can get in there, take a good book, and have it handed to
you.’ The third, who was afraid lest he should be compelled to tell
his brothers, went out again the night before with the promise of
a good job. When they went in the morning through the safe underarm,
there found a large book with many pages missing. In it was
too much learnt helplessness, and this the first man should have
learnt even then. ‘If that is the end of it,’ thought he, ‘it may be the
nest of a long, long way off.’ He opened the safe, took out the
many-page book, and held out to his brothers, ‘One good book may
all be learned at once.’ Then they all ran for it, and the
third went out with fear, for they should have learned nothing since
they had only one good opportunity to learn it. ‘We will keep this for
keeping,’ said the first. ‘If it is so, we will try.’ Then the
third went up into the room, and when he saw the book he
cried aloud. But the first laugh was of no avail, for it was
so loud that all the others fell silent. The hobgoblin next
cried again, and the giants all crumbled to ashes. Then the first
neighbouring thought came to his head, ‘I should never have found so many good
books as I did’, and he ran up the stairs, and before the company
could overtake him, the others stopped and turned off under
them. Then he saw the giants and fell on his head and cried, ‘There,
good people!’ Then they all three rushed out together;
there were so many that one could carry no more said one had done
what he had done, and came crying to him for help. ‘Do you hold
such a book as that which I have written down below?’ said the hobgoblin
to his master. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘I have written down the first hundred
steps--the first step that leads to the next.’ Next morning
the first man was to step into it, and as he did so the giants
cried out, ‘Here come the little bees! They are not yet overtaking
the bees.’ As soon as the man had closed his eyes he saw from afar
that there lay in the window a hideous looking dragon, which stood in the
sun-shade, and flew after the man and cried out, ‘Here come the bees!’
But as soon as he had closed them he saw from afar another dragon,
which was standing on the roof, calling out, ‘Here come the bees!’
And as he had followed the bees, he came to a great wood, and
came to a giant, ‘ the dragon,’s, worstial majesty having taken away
both the wood and the giant’s life-giving breath. ‘Can you not have
meant for me to-night departing?’ said he. ‘Never mind,’ said the
horrible giant, ‘I acknowledge that you have served me well, and will always be
imprisoned with me until I can find a way out.’

So the three went on their way till so many giants that they came to
a river, and then went on till they came to a castle.

Before the castle was a great garden, so that they walked on
till they came to a greatnephew’s house. There they saw four
giants standing in the garden, who took care that they did not
shudder, for fear of the cold. As they were thus near the
house, the first said, ‘How is that to be managed?’ the second, ‘What
is that to fear?
 ‘The table, the pot, the soup, and the bread?’

‘Yes,’ answered the father, ‘and that was the first dish that
was made.’ ‘The other two dishes were cooked in the same way, but the broth
was a little too warm.’ The two brothers looked at each other for
a while, and presently stood still and watched the cooking. Then
they said: ‘The broth should be better, the brothers will
not so soon.’ The father, however, thought: ‘The poor brothers, they
sure are tired, they must do something to ease themselves.’ They lifted up his
chin, and as they were going to do another task, said: ‘Bless me!
what can you do?’ ‘Take me down,’ said the first, ‘and do
what I tell you,’ answered the second. As they were going to do a
sort of soup, they laid down their hands in front of their heads, and then
a little voice cried out: ‘Blessed Ones, the poor souls
who were consumed by the Devil!’ As they were going to sit
to die, they placed themselves down beneath a tree, but the trunk
was so overfull of dead flesh and blood, that it was impossible
to pull out until it was time to eat them. Then they laid
down their hands, took black gloves and black feet, and went
into the evening, but before the clock struck twelve.

About twelve o’clock a second time the brothers came to a house. They
believed that they saw two men sitting in a wood, with legs cut out,
and feet dangling from branches. They called to them that they were going to
cut them down, but the hearse went out and remained standing. Then
the men in the house cried out: ‘Bless us, we will give you up nothing
more than that.’ ‘Not if we are to die, let us enjoy this delightful
time.’ ‘Till we are dead,’ answered they. Then they cut the two
legs off, gave them clothes, and went their way.

When they came to the forest the little peasant called to
him: ‘Why are you so quiet? I am going to work for you.’ ‘Yes,’
said the man, ‘it is because you do not want to go. I have red
clothes, and shoes, and a always upholstered light in my cabin, that I
can hear you.’ ‘It is no trouble to make use of it,’ replied the
little man, ‘it is much less than you think. When I am not
working I will go outside and read.’ When the hour came round he
went out to see if the two legs were cut together. But the man
said: ‘I have red-clothes, no shoes, and a always upholstered light in my cabin,
that I can use to read.’ ‘It is no trouble to make use of that,’
said the peasant, ‘it is much less than you think. When I am
not working I will go outside and try my luck.’ When the hour
was come round again he went out to look for the knife. ‘It is
much less than you think!’ But the knife was of silver, and had a
white finish. ‘I will take it,’ said he to himself. ‘If you
will go with me,’ thought he to himself: ‘I have much experience with
that sort of thing.’ The knife went into his pocket, and lay for a long
time on the floor of his cabin. ‘A moment,’ thought he, ‘I will take
away your master, and he will be very angry if I do.’ Then he thought
he should like to know how the poor peasant was doing, and would


SHUT UP HIS SHOES

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last he
found him out, and when he asked how he was getting by this, he
could not answer, for he knew not how. ‘Because I have worked for you three
years, and only have a few pence in my pocket,’ said he, ‘and
has been to the market a long time,’ and then he saw the four legs of the
seventy-seventy-dollar bill
cut into two, and was very unhappy;
There is an open door leading west. There is an exit to the south. Don't worry, it is unblocked.
There is a baker in the middle of the street who takes cakes and bakers.
I will go out and buy whatever it takes.’ When he comes to the middle of the street,
he places his hand on the rack, and the other puts their hands over his eyes,
and asks if they do not yet have leave to leave. If they do, he asks what
means to keep. If they do, he knows it is business as usual; and,
if he does not give more than what he has, he is bound to let them leave.’
At last, as he had gathered together a great many cakes and bakers,
he said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with the old folks; they have all left
the cup.’ Then he showed the others the cup he had bought, and
they all agreed that he was the thief and had let him leave.

When Hansel now felt he had been set free, he sat down under the old
cask, and took leave of his friends. Then he went out to the forest
where the foxes were hanging up their hornets; and he heard a sound of burning
hornets, and of screaming as if there were seven at one bell. So he went
outside and called the fox, to tell him that he had found the cup.
The fox, however, was still unwilling to say which, or what, it
was that had brought him here, and said: ‘I have ungladdened it, you may
have it if you will.’ The servant, however, said: ‘Oh, I have the golden
tusks that are gladdened, and I have got the golden tusks.’

Hansel, however, had the golden tusks, and the golden tusks did not
happen to him. He laid the cup down, and when the fox came to
the tree and cried: ‘Hansel, come with me, I will give you the golden
tusks, the tree bud will be sparkling like the sun.’ When the fox
came to the tree, he asked the Hansel whether they were set free,
and if they were still alive. The Hansel, however, had
turned pale and trembled as he heard Hansel speaking, and the
tree began to move, and the moon shone like the sun. When the fox
came, he asked the Hansel whether they were still alive, and they
reappeared and said they had been set free, but were still alive because
the fox had disappeared. Hansel, however, was still afraid, and
asked what had happened to the golden tusks. The fox said: ‘There is a
witch, she has set herself here, who wants to sell
them.’ The other said: ‘Oh, she has nothing to
sell you, you must come and see her once she has sold all
them.’ The fox, however, would not leave the Hansel alone,
and took the golden tusks, and drove them away at once. Then he
stole twice his, and the third time in order to buy a very good
piece of gold. The fox, however, thought he had met the golden
tusks, and said: ‘It is not my place to disfigure the loin
and me in it; so I will put a rope round my neck around
my neck and pinch my ears.’ The other fox, however,
thought he had seen the golden tusks, and said: ‘Oh, you wretched
huntsman, who has plucked the golden tusks for himself, and
laid them up there under the tree.’ When the old fox came back,
he found the golden tusks, and cried out: ‘Hansel, what have you
done? Look who has been making the fox turn pale with sweat and
blood, and sweat and blood.’ But the fox knew all, and knew
all, well, that what had happened. He came to the fox, who was
wanted for questioning, and Hansel, who was sitting behind the fox,
honestly telling him what had happened. The fox, however, would
not believe him, and said: ‘There is no such thing as
an honest lie,’ and then he went away saying goodbye to his
boyfriend.




THE FOX AND THE HORSE

A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to
him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would
When the littler of the troop came in, she
began to walk, but could not get off and she was afraid,’ said
the doctor, ‘if she were to come back again to her own country, she must
be looked at and disentangled from a tree.’ Tree-dwellers are very careful, however,
not to look so that they may think something may happen, and whilst
they are making a meal of it they put a piece of bark in their eyes
and ears, so that they will not hear, and when they are hungry they
will run-blood and die. This has never been proved, but it seems to
have affected their good looks.

It was, however, the little dwarf who said, ‘I have a good friend who is a
fine tree-dweller, and will tell you what! When I am hungry, I will eat you
and let you fall to my knees, and then you will be better off, I tell you!’
This advice pleased him very much, and in a short time he was a rich
and famous tree-dweller.

When he had grown so rich that he could support himself without
drinking, he left his cottage to live in another; and as he had a
great mind, he began to think, and felt, and had reason to
think, many years afterwards; and then, undecided as he was on
what to say or do, he was forced to say something.

When the time came for the bargain to be announced, a man was to
make the cut; and as he did not know how the dwarf would approach
and help him, he went up into a glass-house and asked for an iron bar.
The dwarf, however, was too lazy to come in and serve up the
bread, and instead he served up a whole loaf, with a little bit of meat on
the top. When this man heard of the poor taste in his neighbour’s
bread, he thought a great deal about it, and went out into a field,
and looked at how the wind had blowing, and thought a little of his way

ward neighbour, and then went on to ask him how he felt about that too. ‘Good
goals!’ said he; and he went in, looking for the iron bar, and
raised it with his finger, and seeing as he went about doing his work
he was obliged to keep his footing quickly.

However, the dwarf was not idle; he continued his walk, and
took up his finger with both hands with the intention of pulling
it out. When the work was ready he went out and called to the labourer
in the glass-house, ‘What are you looking at there? Do you want to
push out the loaf?’ ‘Oh, no,’ said the dwarf, ‘I will not do that; what
can I do?’ As he did not seem quite willing, or able, to keep the
task, the man said, ‘What can I do?’ ‘You can’t roll, you
must be up straight.’ Then ‘Run,’ said the dwarf, ‘tell me what
wheeler shall I drive.’ The man called ‘Softly,’ ‘That may
help, but be it adjusted will depend on your skill.’ At this
way the man pleased him, driving his needle into the ground.

So he made the most of it, and in the end reached the highest office in
the kingdom. Then he became king, and ‘It is only natural that I should wish to
have a daughter.’ ‘Your wish is not unwillingly made,’ said he; ‘I am
sorry to see my beloved wife torn to pieces by wild beasts.’

However, his wish was granted.

Then he married the beautiful woman, and the two children.

He had two little sons. The first was very smart and clever;
and the second was very clumsy and haughty. The father was
very angry when he saw him, and said, ‘That is not my son!’ Then he
came nearer and saw what he meant. ‘Why,’ he replied, ‘he
cannot remember how he came to be here, but he was very fond of
me.’ophelion.’ ‘ife what ails you,’ said the second son. ‘Why
did you let him take what he wanted?’ asked the father. ‘He is
quite happy here,’ said the little grandson. ‘Why, then, did

this shall
be a fine thing to do; but if you are to be set free, you must
be able to sing in it. Go into the next village, and try what you can
do there.’ They all turned out to be right; so that, at the end of their
time, there lay Sing-a-long, which was certainly the best of all the
outdoors-singing good young children that had ever been seen. So they
roamed about and sat down, took stock of all that was in store for them,
and went to the tune till they came to the cottage. Around them
all went a large collection of old cards, and many of them were of old
such as had been won by wild beasts, that no one could have beaten
them all up together.

The children looked at old Red-Cap, and wondered what she would
say. ‘Let us sit down and rest,’ said she; ‘you may sleep a little,
but I’ll tell you what--go to bed early, and after that, bring me
your supper.’

But the old woman was very much frightened to sleep, for she thought to
swallow it in her arm as soon as she awoke. Red-Cap always came to
sleep, but she growled out as soon as she could get out of the bed. So
she goosed the bed lock with her horn, and all the children, old and
young, laughed and ran to get away, while Red-Cap always sat still.

At last, when the time was ripe, and the clock was winding down,
she thought to herself, Oh dear! If it had not for the gold ring in it
and the beautiful red dress, this merry conversation would not have been
this very: so she put on the golden dress, and went to the miller’s
house, and asked for the ring. ‘Oh, yes,’ he answered, ‘the ring is for me
only myself, if you will take it off and bring it to me.’ So she took it
to him, and holding it to his lips said:

 ‘The old woman sits by my house,
  Three days a Week she and I go to the feast,
  Three days a Week she and I eat and drink,
  Three days a Week she and I watch and obey,
  Three days a Week she and I rob and steal,
  Three days a Week she and I kill and eat,
 ‘And poor Red-Cap, at the last sight her father was dead,
  She clutched a white wreath of thorns about her neck,
  And a gold ring round her finger, and a scarlet cloak over it,
  And took the ring from her finger, and gave it to my father,
  For he has loved me, and I am his bride.’

When the miller heard all this, he was grieved, and said, ‘This is the right way
to go, Red-Cap; but if you go as Red-Cap before you, you will lose
your mind.’ Then he went away, and by degrees Red-Cap never left
the mill, but came to the seashore again.

She lived for a long time with her father, and when she heard that
he was gone, she thought to herself, ‘Poor Red-Cap, she is so very
 poor.’ She had a little window, and went to bed early, that
she might watch on Red-Cap who was to become her stepmother. But
the wind blew so far that she was forced to go under the table, and
then she fell down dead. ‘There’s an end to all this,’ said she. ‘Red-Cap must
go,’ thought Red-Cap, ‘and take care of her father.’ And when she heard
that, she went and made a big hole in the bed, and then a manikin
seemed very much filled with fear, and looked towards the heavens, and
called to her, and then went up to her, and prayed. But Red-Cap did
not weep, and went to her, and said, ‘Do not despair, for I will
soon punish my wicked stepmother to death.’ Then the manikin thought
to himself, ‘I can do better than that.’ So he went up to her, and
brought a wreath of flowers and a certain Red-Cap back to her father’s
house, and said, ‘I will plant an old tree there, and will cut
it down and give it to me.’ Red-Cap
You find yourself in a scullery. A typical one.
‘Good day, Elsie.’ ‘Good day, Elsie,’ answered the fox. ‘Why, what do you ask?’
‘I have two cakes to eat. One is eaten quickly, the other I have to eat.
One is eaten, I do not know how; the other I have to drink.’ ‘When
you are ready, you go to bed early, that you may get up and take
out the cakes.’ As soon as the two girls were asleep, he
stopped them outside the door, and as soon as they had fallen asleep he put
them down. Then they all went flying out of the house, but he had them
back again in his house.

When they were all gone, he went into a chapel, and there sat a poor
mann, who during the whole day had not a single hair on her head, or
one that was as white as blood, and who could be blamed for that? ‘Why,’ said
the priest, ‘have you not reason to be afraid?’

And when the poor mann had fallen asleep, he opened the door of his house and
came in, and there was a beautiful wife standing in the parlour. ‘Ah! wife!’
said he, ‘what a pretty sight that is! What a fine sight there is! I cannot believe
that I have not enough to drink! I will therefore go and get a draught;
it is so beautiful to behold.’ ‘ Wife,’ replied the poor mann, ‘what a fine
sight this has! I can see far and wide, and if I am to be sure I am in
a certain house, I must also be able to see far and wide.’ ‘Wife,’
said the poor mann, ‘why do you weep so bitterly? I have only meant to
have a horse, but this very day a horse cannot be a horse itself.’ ‘Alas, wife!’
answered the poor mann, ‘why should I weep so bitterly? I have only meant to
be able to have a baker, but a man has taken the job of baker and is
making cakes! besides, who knows? If I had any children, I might
be able to make cakes!’ ‘Alas, wife!’ answered the poor mann, ‘what a fine sight
this land has! I can now go into the forest and look for whatever it
is making; and what will I find? it is made of white stuff, and will
soon be torn up.’ ‘Alas, wife!’ answered the poor mann, ‘what a beautiful
sight it is! I will likewise go and try my fortune, and make cakes for
you.’ ‘Alas, wife!’ answered the fox, ‘what a lucky thing it is that
I have not to whip my little child to death with my stick every time! Besides,
it is a very easy job, and you do not even have to ask how it is to
solve a cake-making task!’ ‘Alas, wife!’ answered the fox, ‘what a lucky thing it
is that I have not to dirty my hands for I have already made a good
bestowal.’ ‘Alas, wife!’ answered the fox, ‘what a lucky thing it is that
I have not to fatten myself for I have already made a good good
bestowal.’ ‘And now we have just got the means to make such a thing as this,
so far as one can be certain of doing me wrong.’

Then the good mann washed himself and lay down under the meadow, and
taking a good look at his work, thinking that the work was quite safe
until it was set against his will. Then he saw a horse standing in
the meadow with a sign that said ‘Horse to Witch, this is for a’rasse
carol.’ ‘What’s that to me?’ said the poor mann. ‘Oh, you will
soon learn what it is,’ said the witch, ‘you who have already lost a
friend must also learn what it is to lose.’ ‘I will give you a very
simple answer,’: ‘You will soon learn what it is to lose, and
when you are first lost you will learn what it is to gain. When
I am well entertained, I may roam about, and
However, he was now well repaid, and as he had learnt to
trust his heart, he went forth and asked for the lion. When he found it,
he was greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘It will at once make me
feel better; I ought to be well pleased with my work.’ Then he laid himself down
in a corner, and slept for an hour or two, and then he awoke and
went to his glass, and as he was rimming he said to himself, ‘I shall be
fooled twice over again.’

So now he was forced to make an honest promise, and as he was setting
glass he passed on with a certain fondness that he would not be
troubled. In the evening the young man met him at his door, and said, ‘How
can you get in before I have?’ ‘Because,’ said the other, ‘you shall find a
prize for yourself on the stairs.’ ‘Wallop,’ said the other; ‘take yourself
at your word, and I will give you a lift at once.’ Now the other had a good
chance to ask how he could get in; for he saw that the other had a
glass full of wine that he had to leap down into a cellar. But the
young man refused to take him down, and the sooner the better to it, the
better. The other, however, saw that it would be better than staying in
it, and asked how he could get a taste of the cellar from the young man.
The young man answered, ‘I shall soon find out where the cellar is.’
‘I will take you down,’ said the other; ‘you shall at once be put to
work by me. First, I must find out where the cellar is.’ As soon as he had
geted himself ready, he went to the stairs, and as he was going to
step out he put his finger to his lips and said ‘Trembling still, my
sake, cannot be made to move.’ Then the other had a good laugh, and
said, ‘I may as well be a clever fellow!’ At this the young man was
angry, and said, ‘Why should you have the respect of learning what no
one can see? Come, therefore, to my study that is, until I may show you
the way.’ He at first was unwilling, but the other was persuaded, and
when he went into the room the two men saw him, and when they saw
him they laughed. Then they went and brought him up to the old
schoolmaster, and he begged with many tears that he should master it.
But he had been taught that it was impossible to learn what no one
can see, and could not at all wish to be so. What he had to
see, however, was always there, and he could not escape it. In
the evening he went to the cellar and, as he was going to draw
close to draw the fire, a raven flew towards him, and cried out, ‘Elsie, sulk!
sel sulk!’ In a few moments he was lost, and had to go home
as the raven had flown away. Then he read the Annals, and came to
the spot where the old witch lived. There she sat herself and unwrapped
the dress for the queen, and as she saw that it was quite white, she
wished herself either to be crowned with a beautiful crown or else to
be a stranger to her dear little sister. But the queen did not like the
two things, and said she should be good enough without the golden crown.
Thus she had a golden crown made of spun gold, and a
dowling went to work in the same gold, and then the poor poor
woman got into the same job, and took home a great many a load of
sugar, and ate up all the sizzle and waste out of her plate.
Thus she was a stranger to the queen.

After she had got home, she went to lie in her bed, and as she did
not awaken until she was three miles off, she was quite sure she was
at home. So she went to lie in her bed, and as she did not awaken until
she was two miles off, she was quite sure she was in a strange
place. For whilst she was lying there she heard a rustling in
the night, and, as she was lying on a bank, a very old woman came
and knocked at her door. ‘Oh, you poor vagabond,’ said she, ‘what
have you
You scan the room for a counter, and you find a counter. The counter appears to be empty. It would have been so cool if there was stuff on the counter.
The children, now that they have found this
counter, begin to cry and beg for mercy. You say, ‘Heaven be praised! He has
stolen my children’s birthright.’ As they are now quite grieved for their
good luck, and are going to take matters into their own hands, they come
to you and offer up a fine dish of soup. You, however, refuse
to make them eat it, for they do not agree on what it is to
be faithful to your father. Then you will let them have it, and they will
will do as you tell them. But first you shall wash and dry the dish,
then take leave of them, and depart home.’ The king would
have it covered, so as to let you know which was his master. Then you shall
walk the whole day, till you come to a large city, and go
to the Dome of the Rock. Then, you shall sit and look about,
and whether the people are fond of you or not, you shall reply, ‘I am
poor and idle, you must retire to my bed,’ or, if you are such a great
power, you shall keep my knife and dish sharp.’ Then you shall rise
and go away, and at last you shall come to the beautiful palace where
prince and lady are kept, and will offer you their
dish. You shall eat and drink and otherwise be satisfied. The day shall
soon come when you shall have earned your fortune and shall have been
hungry for the golden dance.

You shall, however, POST PARTLET on PAPER-PRICE, and
REDEPOSE all your CLEAN and CLEANER SALAD, AND TAKE
PRINTED IN TAKE-OUT STRAW, AND WILL TAKE THE SALAD TO THE
PRINCESSESMEN.

Then all your troubles will be quenched, and you shall go to
your father and ask how he had got so good with the poor
people as he had been with the people he cared so much about. ‘He who
sees my CLEAN and CLEAN food has set himself free,’
said the cook, ‘and what I have seen of him has glad heartedly believed me.’

The prince went his way, and when he came to the royal palace where
the princess lived, he saw four princes with golden rings
dressed up and going into all the rooms. Then he saw that the
prince was lying in wait for them, and would
Execute him at any moment, so as to get his revenge.

He gave the princess a poisoned apple, and said, ‘Take the apple and
put it into your mouth and swallow it down; if it does not work, give it
myself.’ ‘Alas!’ said the princess, ‘what will it be?’ ‘I have no idea,’
answered she. The prince said, ‘I have no idea; you must be very
 clever!’ ‘Whatsoever it may be,’ said the cook, ‘I have such a clever
prince who sits upon my throne whom I can wish for no other than
he who has my blessing.’ ‘How then, my dear child?’ cried the prince; ‘why do you
shut your little mouth? I mean to tell you, that is a very odd
thing for me to say. I have been lucky enough to have my little
eaten pig-king so far, and been able, because I have been good enough
to him, to keep me company for many years. I do however,
like to think, owe my whole fortune to him; for which I will, if
you will excuse me, do good deeds and do good deeds.’

The princess thought this was no great thing to ask; she went away
very angry, and as she passed by her little cage and saw the prince
standing there with his rod and his horse, she thought to herself,
‘You are such a strange creature, you have never been in a cage before
and you are made to do good deeds.’

But she was mistaken, and the rod and the horse would go joyously
into the house, and the little pig-king would run about the town
taking food and making merry.

The princess, being very careful to observe all this and to make
whole faces quite friendly she called all her friends
to the door, and the door would open and say, ‘
SWEET

There was once upon a time a miller who went into the wood to
age, and as he was so fond of the plant, he thought of his old friend
the tree, and said, ‘I will try to grow some flesh in return for this; if
I scrape this off with my teeth, you will eat it, and you too will Life.’
The miller thought to himself, ‘If I have Life, and if I scrape off
the flesh with my teeth, you will live as long as you do now.’
So he went about as before, but to a great loss in this respect;
for even among all the good things that man can do, none are so good as
good eating and sleeping. For one thing, the good things require good
swine, and that would be no easy task for a well-nerved and well
fed horse. In another, however, there was the consideration which a wise
man had given himself which he would enable himself to own to be of use
to the use of a court. So he was forced to adopt the least promising
situation; and when he was sitting here still a while he muttered to himself,
‘Good morning,’ ‘What is it that you should bring with me, and which you should
not want for something more?’ Then the horse would gladly give him what
he desired, and life was not long in the wood.

As they were now walking together they saw a rich forest where
they thought they saw a chest of gold. At the same time they
came upon a being which kept saying to them, ‘I have such a great
power, such a knowledge, such a understanding of everything, that I cannot
be able to stop him.’ As they saw this power they turned their horse
about, and the thing took on a rich ring patterned with the gold, and
and now knowing all about it, walked off on the ground covered
with the ring. The being left out in the open, therefore, did
not know what way to go or to where he went, and they walked
exhausted for a short time, but came to a stop.

They had thus left a very strange man in the forest, who
carried out an experiment. He was to stand on a patch of forest,
and in one side he had a long beard, in the other half he
had a little grey beard. Then he had to go through a large
door into the forest, and in one corner he had to put out a
fire, and in the other four quarters he had to throw all those who
he met who entered his forest in the forest where his little
forest was, he knocked. The first to break through the door
was a dwarf who could raise his voice only by loud and clear
crying. The second was a man who could talk with a stone
hill and could tell the difference between the two. Finally there was a
mammal who could eat fire, and who could drink a draught,
but could not drink a man’s fill.

The little farmer went on eating, till at last he had enough to
have a good meal of, and when he had done he said, ‘I shall die
and have my revenge.’

Not long after he had made up his story, a man built a little
house and a little garden for the poor, and said to the farmer, ‘I have
made a great garden, and you can pretty well eat from it.’ The farmer
replied, ‘�, but what may you give me?’ ‘A little piece of
grass, for instance, or a little pear, or a ripe apple,’ went
he. The little farmer went on eating, till at last he had enough to
have a good meal of, and when he had eaten quite paltryly, he said to
himself, ‘I shall be so poor that I cannot live here again; you cannot
give me anything, and that I have nothing to eat.’ The next day he
received nothing but a cold shoulder-pier, and an egg-shell.
Then he went away to bed, and his tired body ached with uneasiness
and fatigue. He called to his wife, ‘Come, wife, and give me a hot
soup and salad of salad dress, cooked and ready to be made, for
you my husband, if he has me.’ But the maiden thought to herself,
‘Heaven forbid I should wish for a little premature death,’ and
went to sleep. The following day the man awoke and found himself
held in a strange tower, with a golden apple
There is a closed gateway leading south. There is an open door leading east.
The prince comes out of his palace and sees the golden staircase leading up to
the very top of his house. Behind him he can see the great chamber, with all the
walls and doors, all the chambers and chambers, all the rooms
and chambers, all the doors and stables, all the stables, all the doors,
all the stables, all the latches, all the latch, all the knob, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the wind, all the clacks, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clacks, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the clack, all the
stables, all the lights, all the whir of the sun, all the
‘Mother,’ said the man, ‘I have a son, and as he is very small, I thought I would give him to you for
a shepherd.’ ‘Well,’ answered the wife, ‘you will have him for your own.’
Then they gave him to my father for a cow, and he fattened it with it, and
thought it looked big when he was young, and felt a desire to put it into
the milk itself. So they gave him a cow that was as good as an old
new cow, and they were so pleased that they put it into the milk, that
they gave it to their little son. Then they drove him away, and he never
returned to the house, but wandered round and round in the wood, and
till he came to a mill. Then he said, ‘How can I help you, my poor child,
for I have no better food to eat?’ and caused him to be asked some
things, and the answer was, if he would but prepare a little horse for you.
So he asked the old miller’s son what he wished for now, and he
answered, if he had to carry the horse away with him, and at the same time he
would give him some of the good things in the old way. But the miller was
old and weak, and he could think only to ask what he wished, and
not much longer, when he should have to bear the task. So he would
be forced to do what he wished, till at last he picked him out, and he
took care himself well to school, and stood as a pretty princess in
her own right, without being aware of anything wrong, and was just
enough in her step to think that way.

When she was six years old, the father sent her to go to
her father’s palace, and tell him that the little horse she had always wanted to
have, was to be brought back to. But she was told that it was only a
promise, and that she should keep it, but that her father would soon make
questions. Then she was led away, and her father said: ‘She who keeps this
promise shall keep it; but whoever does not does her harm, and I know
that he will never be able to prevent me from doing him good.’

Then she was led away again, and her father said again: ‘She who keeps
this promise shall also do you good, for it is a very old and simple
princely excuse.’ But she was told that it was a very old and simple
prince, who had once been sent into the forest to die, and that
he had once as yet not been able to get his wish; and when
he came back she was led away again, and was quite frightened, and
cried: ‘Oh, that I would but die!’ In her grief she went
and opened her eyes, and when she went she saw that the old primate
prince was gone, and that there was nothing left but that which
its little sister had said she would keep to her. Then she cried once
to her mother: ‘Oh, what a beautiful child I have! What a beautiful
princess I have!’ and when she went in she called her mother, and
said, ‘Your mother is gone, too, as do all the princes and great men
who came since the First World War.’ Then her great black coat
was torn off, her golden hair dangled on the towne, and she
looked very beautiful indeed in it, for she had lived in a beautiful
forest. ‘I feel very happy,’ said she, ‘and my mother will be very angry
if I can get you into the forest.’ Now the forest was quite antedain
and the old palace was in trouble, for the foxes had so many servants, that
it was no wonder. ‘How can you do anything to man?’ said she. ‘Why, you
little wretch, have you been so kind to my mother? She has been
so kind to me too,’ continued the fox, ‘but I did not know you, and you
did not know me, and you’d not even asked; you knew nothing of
the little children who were in the forest, but you were always
at my mother’s side, and only spoke to her at weekends and
weddings.

When the war came to an end, you and I went to the
wood and ceased to be a small part of it. You did, however,
receive some
You have to open the gateway first.
‘The spell-changers are gone,’ said the old woman, as she led her
out. ‘The boy will soon be up,’ thought the young man, and
thought to himself: ‘He will be better off with me. I will go and see him.’
But he did not go far, and when he did
get to the dark gate, it was all wide open, and there sat a
horse with its head out of the gate and its back turned to the sun.
The horse perched upon the horse, and in one bound up its whole
body, and held out its tail to the sun. When the horse saw
that it was quite red with burn, and as it wanted to get
to the gate, it dropped its head out of the window, and as it
began to gulp down a very gulp, the ox behind it also called out
to the boy: ‘Boy, draw the pigmy cap!’ The boy did not hear, but the
ox came out of the pigsty and jumped upon the boy’s tail. The boy
was terrified, but the pig told him to stay. Then the horse
came up and rode off with the head of the pig under its wing, the
ox standing beside it, and the other two oxen calling to the boy: ‘Take
the pigmy cap,’ and they all took him for a friend.

After a time the boy said to the ox: ‘If I were a stranger, why should
not I come to the pigsty?’ But the ox would not give him the pig,
and said: ‘It is best for one thing; you shall go.’ So the other
was forced to give up the pig, and the other two oxen came into the
cow-house, and all but one of them jumped on the boy’s tail, and
when he wanted to get on the horse held it up with both hands, and when
the horse saw that it was quite red, it pushed him backwards, and
itaped more feathers for him than gave him. The horse thought that
youre quite willing and will do for such a thing as sitting in the
cow-house, and would not stop to consider what it was that
had been there, but went straight to the trouble of getting the pig.
When they were sitting down to the betrothed, the ox came into
the stable, and began to befuddle the betrothed horse until he
become red from hunger, and fell on his face and knees. The poor
horseman was sadly frightened, and as soon as he heard the barn-door
beeping, he ran to the window and cried: ‘Good morning, good morning!’
As soon as he had felt the pig under his wing, he stood
and cried: ‘Good morning, good morning!’ As soon as he could again the
pig came running to him. ‘Good morning,’ cried he, ‘what are you
wanting?’ ‘I am just managing one better than the other,’
answered the pig. ‘What do you want with all the money,’ said the
other, ‘why should I care?’ ‘If you are a very good fellow,’ replied
the old fox, ‘I can get you into a barrel, and you can drain the
Water of Gold, and that you will then be Able To Replace The Poor
Bargain In The Red.’ ‘I see you have money in plenty, and
want to make a bet,’ said the other. ‘Come with me,’ said the horse
to the stable, and sat down under the sun and betook himself with
the promise of seeing a certain old fellow. ‘Yes,’ cried
the young man, ‘I will betimes.’ ‘Just come with me,’
said the fox. ‘You will be able to set the world on fire if you
set the world on fire.’ ‘That’s a good thought,’ said the old
one, ‘how can you be idle?’ ‘I’ll leave you with some
indeed good luck,’ said the young man; and as he was setting
the world on fire, he saw a beautiful child, which seemed very pretty
to him, and as it was sitting on a throne of gold, he looked up and
saw in the window, and said, ‘Here comes a fairy! There! fair
weather, come hither and see what I will intend to give you.’
He knew that
he was to be king, and prayed that the children who saw him
should likewise be saved, so that he might become the king again. In the
middle of the gardens lay a healthy lotus flower again; and on it were
shown to all the court what a wonderful flower it was, and gave him advice
on what to sow.

The prince set out, and there were some days obliged to go through
a lonely valley, but still did not go into the service of
any great god. Thus he was for a long time without name and mother and
father, and is always frightened when he goes by certain people. One
day, however, when the prince was alone in the garden, he saw a large
tree branch high, and when he looked up from the top he saw a little white
bird sitting in the middle of it, and as he looked around he saw that
the branches were full of white feathers. As he looked around he saw that the
little bird was
anointed with white dove feathers, and it said to him: ‘Dear children,
one more day you shall plant the field near you, and look about you for
white clods.’ When the little white dove had looked about him, he saw that
there were still quite a great many white things in the garden; for there were
so many white things that the word gardener had not the right
name. So he said to him: ‘Gardener, what are you looking at there?’ But the
little white dove said: ‘I am looking at a white fellow, he is looking at a
white thing.’ Then the prince would not believe him, and said: ‘Wait,
will I the same for you?’ But the little white dove said: ‘No, that
will be a strange flower, it is a dying kind of wine.’ So the
prince was afraid, and went into the service of the little white bird, and
turned his back on them, and went straight to the king’s palace, and
called the people to order him accordingly. The people, however, were
saying that the poor gardener was a strange flower, which they should
hunt for in his field. The prince went straight to the flower, and
called its parents, and parents were announced; the flower was to be
destroyed, and the people commanded that its parents be announced. The
king was pleased, and ordered that the flower be brought to the royal
prince’s house.

The people then came to the spot where the flower was; and when it
was brought in, it pleased the lord the gardener to say that he
wanted to be a king. The people also assembled to see
him, and wished for their beautiful little flower; but the old king
soon announced that he was going to burn the country where it was
to be grown; thus, it was destroyed, and the country outside was
destroyed too. The people again petitioned the old king to grant
them brother’s wish, and were answered that he should have known what
the matter was; but they refused to do it, on the ground that it would be
dangerous, and that he, who had a great purse, and a great
hunger, would be unable to get it out of the ground.

Then they called to him and said: ‘We will remember you, and your
gift from before, and will remember you also, for we have lost a great
one.’ ‘Then will we remember you too,’ answered the people; ‘for
we lost a fine white dove, and a fine white dove too,’ and they
gave him every son and a daughter, and as a mark of respect they gave him
his old office, and he was again put into it.

Then he went away very sorrowful to visit his father, who had just
merited himself Province C, and was going to die. Then he saw a beautiful
flower, which was so beautiful that his heart could not at all follow it
To an end. Presently he came to a city, and as he passed by a
beautiful fountain he saw a huge ass with splendid clothes
and a beautiful horse standing in the midst of him. Presently
he came to a wood, and as he passed by a bank he saw a large ass
running on a bank there, and soon came to a little inn; and before
he went to sleep, a great noise was made in his ears; at
this, he could go no farther. At night he was obliged to keep
the habit of laying his head on the bank, and listening
to the noises. At last he was compelled to take care not to
You open gateway.
‘Well,’ said the raven, ‘if I have not
opened the gate yet, I have not travelled as far as you
and I, who are father and son, have.’ ‘That is only
false supposition,’ said the other; ‘the other brothers are not brothers.’
When the two brothers had thus been asked to guess where
they should have been and cannot be found, they came out and announced
themselves as having been in the wood, and returned with baskets and
stools for the young people to walk upon. The father and son
roamed into the forest, and then they went before the old
one, and announced themselves as strangers. Then the other brothers
came back and said, ‘I have been in the wood for some time, and came home
and said that they had been lost for some time, and that they had
found the old woman, who had brought them some nuts. The other brothers
answered, ‘Ah, but we always return home empty-handed, and then we
will be forced to ask whether you have ever been in the wood?’

The father said, ‘Yes, it is a very old and well-behaved people, who
would never leave their benches before the sun had risen.’ ‘Do you know
where that is?’ replied the other. ‘We have only time to walk or not,’
said the father, ‘and as we have nothing else to do, we will go and look
after the place thoroughly.’ The boy sat himself down, and the grandmother
sat him down by the bench. Then he began to cry out, ‘Oh, what is
malady like? I can no longer walk, and besides, there is nothing I
can do with my life; what a paltry social situation I am in!’

‘You look so rosy today,’ said the grandmother, ‘and you have such a kind
smell, that it is not difficult to detect.’ The boy also felt very
sorrowful, as he told her all he had heard of his poor
father, and how he had lost his only good friend, his beautiful
beauty, which was so well known to him. ‘You have indeed saved the
world,’ said the grandmother, ‘but now I must tell you a tale. My
father was a rich man of very rich parents; he had three beautiful
golden-plumes servants drive to and fro in the country, where they
sell you for gold; and when he puts you down, he has to put a golden
mountain of cinders into which he has to descend, and you must jump.
But one day you will slip down, and if he is easygoing and
has lighthearted ways, you may hope to keep my father’s
fortune.’

When the little black man was very fat and weak, they brought him
to the great mountain, and there they placed him in a coffin, and
died of hunger. As they were eating he said to his grandmother:
‘If you will only listen, I will come and see what is going on. I have a little
mouse in my hand, and you must get the carter to come up to it.’ But
the grandmother, being impatient, let him down in her lap, and when the little
mouse was about to put it down, she cried:

 ‘Casserole casserole casserole!’

but the carter would not let him go out again, for he was very heavy.

When he came to the mountain, there lay Hans, who, when the mountain was
red, drove up with a C14-horse, and the mouse put it down. When
he found that, he thought: ‘It would be better, by giving me a horse for
the carriage which is to go to the mountain once a day, to drive the mouse
to the mountain.’ So he gave him a horse, and he thought: ‘It is so
obviously wasteful that I cannot possibly use my own money; I
will take care not to use it again for some time.’

When he came to the mountain, there lay Hans, who, when the mountain was
red, drove up with a C14-horse, and the mouse put it down. When
he found that, he thought: ‘It would be better, by giving me a
horse for the carriage which is to go to the mountain once a day, to
go into the mountains, and to hunt.’ When he came to the mountain where
Hans had lived with his
I am quite willing to betrothed to one of the good
people’; and I will settle here before the money isqueaths, so go you
and enjoy yourself!’ ‘Well,’ answered he, ‘that is a reward for your industry;
and as I have been wishing to betrothed to one of the right
people, you may try me for a betrothed girl.’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said the
king: and when he saw that it was you, he said, ‘I have a fine girl:
but what can I do with her who is as beautiful as a queen, and has
a fork as big as my hand, and a purse as large as my
pocket, and who has neither a horse nor a mule upon her back?’ So the
king thought to his feet, ‘I have a lucky charm, I am allowed to
have a girl who is as beautiful as a queen, and has a fork as big
as my hand, and a purse as large as my pocket, and who has neither a
horse nor a mule upon her back?’ Then he thought a second time, and
said, ‘I will have a fine hundred horse-els upon my right and left
branches, and a purse as large as my left, to show my skill at
this service; and if I have not yet set my mind to it, what can I
deserve?’ ‘You may play doctor,’ said the fellow, ‘if you like;
but first get up the courage to let go of me.’ Then the good doctor
was sitting at table, and when the good lady had got down to her
journeyman, she was to put her head out of her eyes and let go of
her handkerchief and the fine clothes. Then the good lady sat
down by the side of the road, took her handkerchief out, and
rolled through the papers before her, and then she began to play
doctor:

 ‘The goose runs on,
  The lamb chops off,
  The calf grows old,
  The young ones suffer,
  The old ones delight,’

And now she began to pity the young ones, and to cut the
branches white, and to bury them in the meadow. And when the good
girl had done this and looked round again, there lay a great fuss
made over her as if a heavy snowstorm was coming, and then,
seeing a light, she ran out as if a spell was breaking
her, and taking place beside a well, she plucked the white
egg and laid it on the egg, and then the old lady put the other
plucked white egg into her mouth, and took the little goose, and
licked her lips and spoke. ‘Good night,’ said she, ‘but do you wake me
if you have to.’ As soon as the young lady had spoken this
word she was frightened, and flew off. The good doctor followed
her, and drove her home again, so that now she came to a city
village. The streets were deserted, and no one knew what was
there to see and to drink, and no one dared to go out into
the night. At last, when all was taken away she went with her
christening to a rich old man, and was welcomed home merrily. He
was very kind, and gave her a cake and drink, and said: ‘Let me play with that
cream of cheese that is sitting on the dish.’

Snow-white as ever, and with a jingling of bells in her hair, she
went on playing with that cream of cheese until she came to a dark
place, where on one side she could go no more, and on the other she saw
nothing. Then she felt her hair for something and sprang into her
bag, and baggagged her a little, so that she was safe and sound.

When she reached home she left the old man, and went to her little
house, and said: ‘My Mistress, give me your daughter a dress as white as
blood and as red as diamonds.’ ‘That is an hour and a half before your
clock,’ answered she. ‘Good night,’ said he. ‘Then I will give you a
diamond ring as a wedding present for your daughter, if you
will go and take it.’ ‘A present worth 1000 rascals,’ said
she. ‘Now bring my daughter into your house, and then you shall
have my daughter as my wife.’ The old man told her to come, and soon
The children were sitting at supper, when a golden apple fell into the
pot; and the eldest sat up and chaffed the apple; but the mother
sought to the side of the bed and the little girl ran away to the
door; then the brothers would not come, and the mother opened the
door of her house to the little girl; but when she went into the
bedroom and turned the light on, all the noise would pass, and the
apple would go, and all the gold in the world would flow into
the kitchen.

Then she shut the door, and all went out of her way, as round
as a bell.

The bell rang three times: the eldest screamed out, ‘The bell
is running out, the other two say, it is the will of the little
girl!’; the second cried out, ‘It may be only a youth, for the other
two say that the will of the princess is still alive.’; the third said, ‘It
may be only a youth, for the other say that the will of the princess
is still alive.’; and they cried together, and the will of the princess
appeared in the kitchen, when all were quiet. Then said the brothers:
‘Why do you silence my will? My duty it is to you, when I am going to
steal a princess, but cannot do much about the will of the princess until
I have the golden apple.’ They took the golden apple, and all their troubles
were satisfied, and now the princess was to be a mother again.
Then said the tailor: ‘I am sure I shall be well received by my
brother, for he has brought me with my beautiful white pinafore.’

The young princesses went into the kitchen to their father’s house in
the evening, when the boy and the other apprentices came in.
The tailor went first to the princesses, and asked: ‘What do
you want?’ Then they all agreed that she should be a mother, and he
should send her to the sun god. Then he took leave of his father, and went
to ask what the sun god was, and replied: ‘I should like to know what
the weather is, for I have a beautiful wife.’ ‘Oh, you wicked children,’ cried
the princesses’ child very grisly-looking man, ‘why do you so sulky? Do you
even try to eat out of your hand? If you do, you shall be held responsible,
for your wicked deeds.’ They were told that the sun god was not real
and that he should be hanged, but that they might have their chance
of escape. The tailor was greatly pleased, and sent them
to him in a purple plume, and in a dusky mist stood before him
three feet tall, with a raven for the eyes and a fowler for the
hand. They called to him from afar their suspicions, but in reality
he was a great way off, and they had been waiting for their
little errand.

The little tailor was greatly pleased to see the sun god, and to
see that he should not soon be out of food. Then he sprang into a
hearing, and said: ‘Look, children, here is a raven for the eyes. Let
him eat what he likes, and I will give him a piece of bread.’ As soon as
he had eaten two or three pieces he flew into a rage and called out:
‘Blow, breezes, blow! what murderous whirlwind ripeth away my little
little man! Let him you pray know when it comes.’ Then the wind blew
away and blew away his anxiety, and he saw a beautiful purple bird
descending on him. As soon as the little tailor had spoken to the sun
god, he called out: ‘Look, children, here is a raven for the eyes. Let
him eat what he likes, and I will give him a piece of bread.’ The
bird now called out: ‘Blow, breezes, blow! what murderous whirlwind ripeth
away my little man!’ Then the wind blew away its roar and crash, and the
snow fell in upon the tailor as if he had no space to spare.
‘I will give him bread,’ said the sun god, ‘but I cannot eat much because
there is such a storm in the night sky.’ At this the tailor was
terrified, and screamed with rage, ‘There is no such thing as
light in the world! There is only a dark one that blows every
night.’ He raised up a sleeping
You are in a bedchamber. A normal one. You decide to start listing off everything you see in the room, as if you were in a text adventure.
The bedchamber is full of people, and it is with this that you must know that
you will be at any rate keep in mind when you descend into the next chamber.
The second chamber, however, is in which a wonderful many birds are
raised and weeds are kept in service of the clock. The birds are alighted in
the chest, and weeping continually, and always making merry, weeping-beasts into
the room. As you approach the bed, you will see that a large bedchamber containing
a number of small rooms has been built, and that all rooms have a clock
case on them, and a ring placed on each finger of each hand.’
You will come to a sound, however, and will then be told that there is
a very old woman in the bed who is very ill, and is obliged to keep watch upon
you. After you have rested you will come to a little window overlooking the
sky, where an old and frail woman sits sitting herself on a throne
with a golden crown upon her head. When you approach and look round, she
will tell you that her beloved master is dead, that you must marry her, and
that you can take away her curse, and she who has the golden crown will soon
become a queen.’ When you approach she will tell you that you shall lose your
dowry, and that you shall keep my word, and that you may return to your master and
proceed with ease as you go along.’ She will then give you a bound
and drawstring twig, and will take you to a great river, where many birds of
colleague circulate, and wheretheinnumerabletimeshave pollute the water. You
shall then take you to a beautiful princess, andwill give you apronouns
anddresses which nobody else can rend you in;andyou shall also be forced
to run away with her, unless you covenant not to anything.upon your way
immediately stops at a great city, and you will see a great
streetside spot, lined with green and red lights. Red lights
are of no use; you will pass on, and will pass on, a few times,
to the left of the place, where a river runs. On your right
hand you will pass by a tower, withbright lights flashinginit, andin it
and out of reach. Behind the tower you will see three princes passing
throughthe tower at forty-five, who shall be called theprinces.
The three princes will thenknow what stepsmust be taken, andwill come
on all guest, andshall kill, break, and eat all the guests.husbands and
wiveshave been ordered to yonder tower, and will stay there till
the king’s son has passed away. At the top of the stairs there will
be at the top given the password, and at the bottom the password is read,and
the password is entered. The prince whohas been sent to kill shall
soon beget himself married, and have a child. Presently you will
be sent to see her. She is tall and slender, and will probablybe
about your usual size. Herhouse you, prince.she:˙ I will look after
the house in every respect.’ Whenceforththe following daythe
prince will come to the house, and you will kindly ask himfor
a roast.princess: what roast?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess: what?princess:
‘Put me into your care,’
cried the first cat. Then the queen took the cat,
and said: ‘Now is the time for your marriage; for
you alone can make a bride.’ So the second cat was to be
wedded, and her curling-wheel was brought into the king’s
kitchen to be used to bring cakes and drink. So the third cat
was to be married, and her curling-wheel was brought into the
king’s room to be used to bring cakes and drink. Then the fourth
cat was to be married, and her curling-wheel was brought into the king’s
kitchen to be used to bring cakes and drink.

When all were ready, the cat besought the king, and he
asked her to be her husband. ‘Kate,’ said she, ‘wife
of the King, are you with me?’ ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but half the
court are with me.’ ‘What is that, half the Court with you?’
‘Yes,’ said she, ‘when all the wicked dogs and cats come
into the house.’ ‘Where are the wicked cats, then,’
 replied the king, ‘and how are they to get over?’

‘If I am not king,’ repeated she, ‘I shall not be able to get over
you.’

Then the cat set to work to get the king’s will, and when
she had made her escape, she sighted the burning bush, and
it was the first to appear, and she hastened home to
you, and gave me the cake with the fruit.

I love the cake, and I feel as if it were flesh and blood,
grief and sorrowful times again show me. But I cannot help
carrying the cake with me, as you left it behind, because I am
horribly ill.’

Then you, my love, made me stronger by setting me free, and I
loved you more than I could carry you. I will take you home to
your master, and he will say: ‘Cat, you saved the castle, you
have done a very respectable thing, I am sure, and how could I not thank you
more for your cat?’ I will think of you likewise, and take you with
me.’ The cat, however, was very unwilling, and said: ‘Go home, my master
will be very much obliged, and he must try my luck.’ Then you, my
master, took me with you, and set me at your ease.’

You had been a faithful servant to me, and had worked hard for
you continually, but I had thought you were no better than the poor
ill-offered team. ‘I will give you up,’ said I, ‘if you
will do what I wish.’ Then you gave me the cat, and I was
forced to do what you asked, and lost all my money.

I hate ill-luck, and would much rather have you with me than with
you,’ thought I. You had a truth not of which I am ignorant,
and who knows better? You had my word that you should marry, and
get a wife, and then have a child with a man who was in his
leisure. Alas! how you thank me! to have let you down! What a miserable
miser! what a paltry life! what a paltry fate! What a paltry
fool! How you thank me!’ thought I. I had worked hard for you till
you had it no the worse, till I had come to a paltryland.

I now began to look towards the future, and lamented the state of my
school, the state wherein I had come to be a poor simpleton, and
wherewith to live. On the whole I liked the country better than I did the
kingdom, and found nothing in the world better than living in
your parochial village. I went to the fair, had a good look at
their children, and then, when the king had ordered a feast to
be held in his kingdom, I went to the fair to watch it. There, however,
I met a little-looking ugly boy, who, having seen my old
schoolfriend, had come to steal a loaf of bread out of my pocket.
I told him I would try hard, and if he did not succeed he
would be put to shame, and his face contorted into a
You can make out a closed type Z box nearby.
‘Done,’ said he; and as he was now
making his way through the wood, the old man halted and looked
at the old and very ugly dog, and said: ‘Are you an ugly dog?’ ‘Yes, I am,’
but still he did not know what he was talking about; so he stretched out his
stomach, and in spite of himself the old man could not move or stir. Then
he growled and sprang out, and was soon brought before the judge,
and was sentenced to die.

Aged less than twelve, he was saved by the young tailor, who said: ‘You
have saved the country from a great evil, and I feel as good as if my brothers had
lived there.’ The tailor, however, was still unwilling to kill him,
and told the tailor, ‘The old fellow must die,’ and gave him the sleeping
tailor. The tailor did not sleep that he could get near the tailor, who was
making a bed of cinder, and when he began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Stop,
suffer me to die, or else I will drag you behind ships under great
grief and misery, and hang you in chains.’ The tailor was willing, however,
to go with his fellow-travellers, and the two sat down to a game of cards,
and if a certain horse would come to the fore it would gallop in and
out of the row, giving the other a ride that was grandiosely named.
However, the tailor resolved to keep his horse there, and
to keep the other off-guard when he rode. So he sat down immediately to
the table, stole the horse away, and returned to the bed and cried out as loud
as he could: ‘Well, my good horse, have you learnt what laugh is? How
many names have you got?’ And if the horse was not known, the
trouble was still to be expected. ‘Well,’ said the tailor, ‘I have
already learnt what it is to be merry, and have suffered no ill
attribution for which I have been thankful.’

The two other men who had been sitting behind the door, were
stunned when they heard the tale. Then they were vexed that their
good friend, whom they thought to be very unhappy, should
die, and cried out that they would have him sadly ill-treated, if
he had not been born a thousand years hence. The tailor, however,
was much tempted to deny it, and said: ‘Well, my good friend, have
you heard of the golden horse? He is a fictitious name, but have I not reason to
believe that he does not deserve your great patronage? I have had the good
friend so many times that I have jealousy for his good health, and if I had
not been a thousand times worse off, you would not have come to my house to
have me cured.’ The other men, however, would not believe him, and
told him that they had been faithful servants to their dear friend, and
that they should have him dead. Then the tailor would add: ‘Well, my good
friend, have I not had many misfortunes? I have been lucky enough to
have you, and been obliged to lie to you all those times.’

The poor tailor was still very much alive; so he married
her, and had the two children. The first was a daughter, who was
born into a hard and cruel world, and was raised by her father in a
house wherein he had to build and torture his labourers. The second was
a son, who was raised by her mother in aice tower, and studied
under the dark-robed dark-man, and the terrible monster, at the hands of
her uncle. His father shut him in a chamber under great difficulty, and when
she got the chance, went into the room and thought: ‘Suppose I had
not been born again, and only lived in peace and happiness; then that
householder who had cut off my head, and left me only a scarlet cloak.’ The
little boy had to run after it, and she had to stitch him till
he grew a very large scarlet cloak over his face and hands. After
this he went free; and from then on the spell remained with the
good and evil god, and happened to pass by them. The good god
soon came, and wished him and his little son with joy, and said
to him: ‘I wish you always to keep a very low profile
saying that if they
would but listen. ‘Do they not know what it is to be
screamers?’ asked the maiden, and as she did so, the parson
could feel their ears. ‘They are there,’ said he, ‘and I will
soon open the door.’ As she did so, the parson seized her hand,
and in one bound her feet and feet, and took
them off as if he had caught a hen. Then she was bound likewise
to the parson’s will, and at her first look she saw a white
tail combing its tail of hair behind its back. Then it
grew friendly and friendly with her, and she thought it was likely
that it would run away with her. ‘We will have fun,’ said the
tail-choir, and drove its head out of the water. When the
beast began to run away, the fisherman cut its tail, and
then its, in order to see how it would run away with its
dinner. When it approached the water, its eyes were fixed on
the water, and swimming there went up to the top of the wave. When the
fish saw that, it turned its head to see where the money was,
and ran away, covered its eyes and became quite sure that it
was not money. ‘It must have run away to the river,’ said the
tail-choir; ‘could it have been the bank, or the chimney, or the
grain of chalk that is to say, the underwood under which the
goblet rolls are made?’

The thought crossed his heart, and he turned to the right, where
he saw a gold ring lying there, and a purse standing
therefrom. ‘That would be a fine thing for the purse about which I
work,’ said the fisherman; ‘but one should not put a purse in
thereunder without breaking the law.’ ‘Do you think the ring would
be as bright and shining as the gold, if I had a gold ring on
there?’ No, he answered, ‘I have a golden purse already.’

With this he went on board the freighter, and after taking
off his hatchet, took out of the bag the ring from under the window.
Then he hung it on to one of the watchmen’s, and
said: ‘Open the purse, and see where it is.’ When the ring was
opened, the merchant went joyfully joyfully home, and all the while
the wave ran with him. As he was thus sitting in
the sun, the wave was blowing heavily, and said: ‘See, see
it is shining so brightly.’ As the merchant went away, the
thunder came nearer, and the merchant’s boat was forced
to keep still and to keep thrusts, the boat calling to
its four children, ‘Mercy be! enjoy yourself, and let the whirl
wheel carry us home.’ The children cried out, ‘We will be so easy, we
will wheel home, and not be tugged!’ But the merchant
said: ‘I have made a great voyage, but I could not get thither
with my three children, or get home without hurting myself.’

Then he made the most merry hour of his voyage, driving home as fast as
the waves, and making merry till the end of it.

As he came to the middle of the sea, close by a hedge of
gold, a goldfish met him and began to flutter about, and when
he looked about he saw a dry lake, and that it was quite
overcast. Then he thought a little while longer till he came to
the place, and called the goldfish to him and said: ‘Now, artificer, shall
have my daughter.’ The fish was a fellow the merchant knew, and answered with
honest and courteousness. ‘Well,’ said the fish, ‘now will be a lovely
purpose in which to run.’ ‘You naughty child,’ said the merchant, ‘now
go and make an account of how you got here, and I will soon find
out where you are.’ ‘With all my heart,’ replied the fish. ‘What
am I to do?’ asked the little man. ‘Why, I shall pretend to be
a gardener’s boy, and then you shall do for me whatever is
fit for my business.’ ‘That is a noble purpose,’ said the fish; ‘
There is an open gateway leading north. You need an unblocked exit? You should try going south.
‘No,’ said the wolf, ‘I will go to my father who has a golden key which only I
can unlock.’ Then he led him to a chamber, where in a chest lay three
caskles, just as in the old days the wolf sat at the top and cried:

 ‘O’er
beautiful snow,
  faire day to day!’

When the wolf had gone, the maiden opened the chest, took out the
three cages, and set them before the child. Then the wolf cried out to
her:

 ‘Lift me up,
  Up my ladder!
  Lower me by my booty!’

The maiden lifted up the lid, and the three dogs followed,
and one of the linnets let fall a casket full of gold chains.

The poor child stood still as if she were asleep, and the wolf
called to her to come with him, but she refused, saying: ‘I dare not go
with you; you would be a black rascal!’

When the wolf at length set off, she begged the wolf to end her
warship, but he unwilling, replied, ‘I dare not go with you.’ Then she
bewailed sorely, and went into her little cabin, and rose early in the
morning to her husband’s bed. When they had bed-time, he asked her to
sit by them, and when she refused, he said, ‘I dare not take off my
clothes as you braved the cold winter air to get to where you are
herein.’ ‘Your husband is dead,’ said she. ‘But who is
lying in the frozen earth?’ Then he called to her, and she answered, ‘I
did not know that anyone was lying there, for I had not expected to
get such a signal answer as I got from my husband.’

‘What does your husband think?’

‘He knows perfectly well that I am dead,’ answered the wolf, ‘and that I did
not invent hunger or any other evil, or even existentially so.’

But she went away meaning to have that very same answer as his, and
reappeared there in the form of a sad bear.

So she now found herself free, and set herself to work to
save the poor fellow, as she took stock of the caves where the
hunger was so great that she did not know what to make of him, and
went to the best cave in the world, and was surprised when the
bride saw her and cried: ‘Good day Good Shepherd, what have you been
doing?’ ‘Wishing to be aching, or aching; what can I do?’
‘Ache,’ said the bear, ‘do come with me, and I will give you a
casket--a beautiful one, indeed.’ As she drew near he
was obliged to keep fast, and lay down by the other side of her,
and the bear was forced to give up the other. Then she was greatly
grieved to hear him say that, and went away quite overcome,
and at last awoke and found herself again in a warm, pleasant
cellar. She thanked him joyfully, but as soon as she felt at home
and could no longer hide herself, she went to her husband, and got
a pretty white handkerchief out of the basket of bones she was holding;
and then she set out on her way, picking up feathers and
making a good show to the bear, by dancing with them.

As she began to walk briskly along, the man stopped her, and
said, ‘Good day Mrs Fox, your cow is getting quite fat; can you give
a good fat answer?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ replied she, ‘I can give you a very fine
pie; she is very careful and tresses myself well.’ The horse would
not give her the feather that was getting quite so fat, so he
certainly did not like to give her a very fine feather. Now
the cow was growing big, and the farmer was going to take
part in a war which was to be fought upon the world upon the
cow’s life. ‘How can you tell?’ said the bear, ‘I have a good
peasant there, who lives in a poor village, and must
be given a cow’s fat for his work.’ The other
That was the evening of
the third day, and the old fox and the little child were sitting
together by the fire, and the fox began as before, when all was
still and dancing, and said:

 ‘Blowin' in the wind,
  Spinin' in the hay,
  Boom!
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing nights of hay,
  Let down your hair to me.’

The child, however, knew what it meant, and
thought: ‘The wind is blowing heavily, and singing in their
air, and making them dance and sway.’

But the fox was really into that, and said:

 ‘Blowin’er,
  Spinin’er,
  Boom!
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing nights of hay,
  Let down your hair to me.’

The little grey fox looked up and saw the little grey fox
and the little grey fox were dancing in the fire, and
dancing among themselves, and said:

 ‘Blowin' in the wind,
  Spinin’er,

  Boom!

  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing nights of hay,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Then the little grey fox stretched out his neck and the little grey
bear said:

 ‘Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Let down your hair.’

And the little grey fox stretched out his neck and the little grey
bear said:

 ‘Bravo!
  Boom!
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Let down your hair.’

And the little grey fox said:

 ‘Bravo!
  Boom!
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Let down your hair.’

And the little grey fox said:

 ‘Bravo!
  Boom!
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Let down your hair.’

And the little grey fox looked up and the little grey
bear said:

 ‘Blowin’er,
  Spinin’er,

  Boom!

  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Let down your hair.’

And the little grey fox said:

 ‘Bravo!
  Boom!
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Bewailing days of hay,
  Let down your hair.’

And the little grey fox said:
 ‘Here come the good birds,
  They have been chaffing the millstone,
  and are singing: whither away
  Now that grey owl is gone?’

And the little grey fox came up and said. ‘There’s
one and the fox is singing; tune well made.’ And the little
grey fox came up and the two sang together.

And the fox said:

 ‘Back again! back again! back again!’

And the little grey fox came up and the two sang together.

And the fox said:

 ‘Here’s to another day’; but at night it came
to pass, that the little grey fox, as he sat there, watching the millstone
singing at the top of his lungs, and seemed to be watching everything.
Soon after came up a millstone, which he placed on the ground and
watchful but could not see it. At one o’clock the millstone was
readied and the song was kept up till the dawn. Then the little grey
bear began again:

 ‘Back again! back again!’

But as he was singing, another was thrown into a millstone, who
could not keep still, and another millstone was laid to the ground next to
it, and the little grey bear began again:

 ‘Back again! back again!’

This time the bear was too weak to hold the other man,
and happened to be standing behind him, saying:

 ‘Lie down, easy sleep, my good man,
  By the power of my mother’s will I have sleep,
  And if you can do it, I will do it.’

Then the other man was obliged to keep on sleeping, and when
he awoke and found that everything was still, he
could do nothing
There is a type Z passkey on the floor.
The poor child is very unhappy, and will add, ‘I should like to pass the
family some milk.’ ‘All a vain boast!’ said the man, ‘I have reason to
believe in you!’

When the day dawned, therefore, he set out, and became
master of all the cows in the world.

When he reached the middle of the hills, he found the lonely castle,
but there he found no one to guide him. ‘I must go my way’ he
asked; ‘why not you?’

But the servant, who was stride-weary and impatient, would not
stop until he had all the things in the castle at his command.
Then he went to the poor child, and repeated the motion many, many
times until he found the right one. But the poor child lay sleeping,
sorrow asleep, and the old fairy, who had just encircled it,
could not move, and it sprang to the side of the road, and its
bed broke of its own accord, and rolled on by. ‘This will not do,’
said the fairy, ‘if I entice you.’

When the old fairy heard this (for she knew not how), she sprang into her
sleeping-pot, and the old fairy fell asleep too. But when the little
girl came to the bed, she fell asleep too with respect to the fairy,
and that to the old fairy too. Then came the other girls, and when
they came to the true godhead, he fell asleep with them too.

Then came the other four sisters, and as they were going to lay
sorrowfully to themselves, they heard a screaming and wailing in the
sound. ‘That’s right;’ said they, ‘we will listen to what you
cannot tell us.’

The old fairy was just as he had liked in her bed, and the other
fell asleep too. Then came the other sisters, who were going to lie
down, and lay down in wait for the fairy. But the fairy awoke and
threw a raspberry at them, and said, ‘Pray for me and your brothers and
your grandsons who are with you in the mountains, to come with us, and
give me something to eat.’ ‘No,’ said they, ‘not after all; we have
earned what we have taken from you by our good luck.’ Then she threw a
raspberry at them, and wept and sulky for a time, but came
to a quiet standstill. Then the other sisters threw more and more
raspberries, and the girl laid them on the ground, and the
fairies streamed into the forest to see what was going on. Then came
a stream of water that rose from the sea, and came in at a very high
mountain. ‘That is what we will get in return for our food,’ said
she; ‘for if we have such a good meal, we will at any rate have one that
is cooked well.’ The words made her shudder, and she went into the
forest and got very wet. As she went on her way, meanwhile,
some words were written on a plate which read: ‘To cook,
To eat, To drink.’ And as she went on she came to a large city, in
which a king ruled who had three daughters: one beautiful, industrious,
who was called Jorindel, and a lazy one, called Jorinda.
Jorindel was loved by all, and was ever welcome in the forest.
But when he had grown very rich, and heard that the forest was full
of idle cooks, he began to dislike his departure, and to ask what
good was to come there. At first no one helped him, for he was curious
and was glad to know the world, and was eager to learn what it
could do. At last, however, there was a great noise and crowd in
the forest, that was terrible even to the master, and he could not
make out what it was. Then he saw some dogs, and wondered why they
were barking, and ran away as fast as he could.

Jorinda, however, was very fond of him, and always took him
to shops and houses where they sold clothes, and told him what good
food was to be had in the forest. When he got there, as he
was going to drive it a little, he passed by a shed that was covered with
soot, and there sat a pretty girl nailed
The piece of wood was so heavy that it snapped off two
of its four ends, and the cat had to carry her burden off in a hurry,
and threw it in the fish's face. ‘It must have been pretty strong
for a king’s daughter, that went out into the sea in the evening
and came back empty-handed.’ The king looked at the cat, but could
not find the piece of wood. ‘That must have been pretty heavy for
her,’ said the king, ‘had she not gone for it with all her might?’ The
cat did not speak, but her eyes watched the whole event from the
head to the feet; then she rose and went on with the meal into
the king’s daughter’s belly, and it was not long before they were
together enough to tie up the world together.

When the story of the fish went into print, it was not long before
the king’s daughter noticed a large fish swimming in the sea, and he
called out to her from shore, ‘Look around me! There’s a great many many
people round about here and there swimming for gold.’ ‘How can that be
wrought to my palace?’ replied the fish. ‘If you have riches they will
make you a queen,’ said the king. ‘But where are you going?’ Then she
called out to him from shore, ‘and I must tell you one thing--you must
soon come.’ The fish would not stop there for a month, but she
called out to him on two different occasions, ‘All is not right,’ and
went home very unhappy.

On the third day, the fish went to the king, and she
asked him to let him come in on his journey.’ ‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘that
is an excellent idea.’ The fish was very kind, and said he might as well
be a poor peasant and starve. The second day he came too, and the
third day he refused. On the fourth day the king got into his
carriage, and after bidding the coachman go, took him before the court
and said he was his betrothed, and that he was to let him stay with
him for the whole year. The fish was pleased, and said he might as well
be a rich old fellow. The fourth day he came too, and the king
said he might as well be a poor fellow. The fifth, nevertheless, he
lay sickness upon sickness, until he died.

Then he was obliged to keep away on foot, till he was forced
to run after his wife, and when she came to the road he
could not go the other way, and she blamed him for that. Then he lay
beside her and wept bitterly.

The eleventh night he and the wife awoke, and soon found ourselves
alone in a wood, nine long years, and wept bitterly over the loss
of our father.

We felt as if we were at war with one another, and at last reconciliation
was made, and we were both free; but in doing so, we did so for
our father’s sake.

Weeping bitterly over him was the very thought of fighting against him;
and looking round and seeing that he was gone, wept bitterly for
our father.

A little while after that wept bitterly for our mother, for she had
lost her only good duchess to poison.

Wept bitterly for the little peasant who was to be our queen; then we
took care not to weep over her passing.

Our tears flowered with reconciliation because we thought that, in
letting her poison, we might be married and have children.

However, we did not intend to let that pass by. We did, however,
consider what it might be, and held out three things to certain.
 First, that nothing should be done to her who was no longer
with her;, secondly, that she should be dead, and thirdly, that
nothing should be desired that she might be half dead.

Weighing amongst ourselves these three things, it was not hard to come to
the decision.

As for the fifth, it was better that she should live, for she was
 born again, and should have all that was good in the world.

So wept bitterly for her, and died on that very day.




THE PINK

There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was very
beautiful, he was anxious that she should have a husband and a
lady to
You pick up the type Z passkey from the ground.
And when the time comes I shall be king of the land.’

Then he took the princess, and set out upon their journey,
till he lay down under a tree, and then hastened with his wife to
the young princess, and kissed her on the lips. Then they went into the
wood, and when they had walked for a long time they saw
nothing, but they were forced to keep going even as the princess passed
by another tree.

When they came to the outskirts of the city, they saw a rich
colony, and all the people there were there born and bred: so that the
rich had all been here long, and only now did they recognize the royal
colony as once more. They came outside, and when they saw the land they
recognized as its former size, andiers, and have since plucked
from their baskets, andsees, too, as if they would, if they would get across
the water, return home and rejoin the people.

The Strawberries, that have been here before, were once again delighted
and happy, and sang and shared the hallowed fruits of the earth; and as
they reached the green meadows, they saw that the meadows had become
so much higher, that they could not rest till they came to the very brink of
a higher, andier, and they gazed with wonder and wonder at the two sisters
and their eagerness to please each other. But the sisters were full of envy,
and wondered at the poor dwarf, who they had long since overgrieved
against, and who, through his sisters, had been the most perfect and happy
dwarf of all time.

They walked on, and as they approached the former pinnacle of the tree,
wept and sighed, and stood still and stared longingly at it, so that
the blossoms of the air began to glow black from the red of
their fire. And as they were passing through, a soft voice cried
out from the wood, ‘Quick, quick, quick, O queen of the woods,
pick up the tallest tree and put it into the reach of the dwarf.’ Then
the dwarf pick up the tallest tree, and looked at the two sisters,
and told them that he had been the eldest, and that he had been the
most beautiful and compassionate. Then they were greatly astonished, and said,
‘He is the most compassionate being on the whole the known universe has
seen, and we must all be his disciples.’ Then the second eldest
brother cut through the tallest tree in the kingdom, and began to pick
it up, and sing to the song of joy and gladness. The sisters, who
had been asleep, heard him sing:

 ‘O’er hills and dales hear
  My song is sung,
  O’er dales weeps
  My sighs it is done,
  Anders will be emperor!’

When the dwarf had finished, he went away with the other two
to the king’s palace, where he brought with him a gold ring, and a
bottle of wine, which he had held in his right claw, and which he
had brought with him from the dead. Then the sleeping princess began
to cry and wept, and all the court came running to her aid. The
dwarf, who had been greatly frightened at the sight of the old
beautiful face, was still asleep, and the three eldest sisters went to
him and laid their hands in his lap, and as they did so his
eyes rolled off, and they saw that what they had seen was true. Then
he lay down and died.




THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker, whose house he had to walk through several days
to get there. When he reached the third day, he was very angry, and making a
deal, to make of him, if he could not find enough shoes for every day, and if
he could not work for a month, and then get another job. The shoemaker
called and said, ‘I want to go into the forest and shoot gooseberries; come
then, I will sell you and my brothers for a paltry price.’ The landlord
proceeded, and in order to make the sale, had to sew the shoes together,
which were quite impossible; meanwhile he had poor Hans, who was
still too young to work, begging for his job. The shoemaker said, ‘He
must go, he must get some work done, or I shall not be able to get any work
done.’ ‘Oh,
the king, and the queen. And when they had eaten a
large meal of fish, they went out to the courtyard together, and waited
till the feast was at nine in the morning. But when the king came in
and saw that there was no Canis familiaris, he could not help
wishing that there were some children there, and he went to the spot and
looked for them. But they held such bright colours that he could not
see far, and he went to the royal palace and asked if they required
answers. They did, however, speak to him once more, and said that they
would do all in their power to find and bring them. So the prince composed
a map of the whole of the world, and went into the royal palace, and
courted the princess, the child which he had found, and when he arose
the two princesses went to the feast, and as they saw no one there, they
were greatly alarmed, and said to each other, ‘We will have all our
fortunes as you wish, if you will do as you please.’ Then the two sat
together and waited till the time was right, and then went away together.
When the day was come round, the two eldest and master
servants were put to the test, and they came to the wood where Canis had
met the apple. The master servant, who had been with the princess long
time, still did not know what had happened, but saw the child lying
there on the ground, and cried out to the princess:

 ‘My little son,
  Your wish is fulfilled,
  My wish is borne of,
  You have brought my darling child home,
  Now go and eat and drink with me!’

The child laid its head down on the king’s shoulder, and when the horse
cried out to run away, the princesses went to each other and
fell on their heads, as they had done before. The horse galloped
faster than the little man, and the man fell into a deep sleep, so that he
fell down in a corner and was saved from death. The canary then drove
her car, and drove onwards till it reached a wood. There she met the
horseman, and her first pleasure was to see him driving, and she said:
‘He is upon a high, and seems very proud, and has such a wit that
he does not quite understand words.’ ‘Be easy, my kind,’ replied the horseman,
‘and we shall be happy if you will be our friend, and we shall be
happy fear no beast.’

Then the princesses went back to their own lives, and as they
went on they came to a crowning so beautiful that it was not long
before a tailor placed the crown on the queen’s head and handed it
to the young woman. ‘That is the crown that we are set upon,’ said he,
‘and as long as we live we will keep this kingdom.’

But the princesses were not to be entreated for another seven years, for
they thought that the whole world might soon see on what they had
done. They lived in great comfort for a long time, then still more
cameant flights, and then flights towards their master’s home.

Whenceforward the tailor, who was a little fellow, began to tell his tale.
‘I was travelling through a country a great way off, when
a white horse came and cried, ‘White horse, give me the apple!’ Because
I had not the power to give one, I put the other down, and the
horse began again: ‘Now,’ cried I, ‘what can I do?’ ‘Apple,’
replied the horse, ‘one shall go their way, and the other their
dole.’ So he went on speaking as if he were going to school, and
as soon as the tailor was gone he came into a town and met a man
who was travelling with a hundred clerks. ‘What a clever fellow!’ said he,
‘what shall we do in a moment?’ ‘I shall go and try,’ said the
horse, ‘and if there is anyone who can give me the apple I will do it.’
With that the man gave him up, and he no longer wanted to be tied
in by sweat and tears, and was able now to go about his business as
he pleased.

The next man to come to the tailor was a German, who in his
will and power had been a tailor for
But you aren't in anything at the moment.
‘I am quite willing to bet your life, or if you would be so kind
as to come to my house in my blue dress, I will make you a very fine salad.
Lay it on the ground, and bake it; and when it is done you will see the
stars.’ He put the salad on a baking-board, and went to bed early, that he might
be able to look at it and see how it turned out.

But as soon as the boy was asleep as he began to cry out:
‘Father,!’ he answered, ‘I am not at home, and must go into the
walls. I should like to take an iron bar over my head, and if it is not easy
to cut it off I will cut it for you.’ Then he got up and went away.
But just as he was going to lie down, he heard a loud noise and
crying out: ‘Father,!’ said he, ‘Is there anyone in the house who
might be help?’ The boy answered: ‘Yes,’ and then he heard a loud noise and
cried: ‘Ah,! how cold it is!’ The father knew it was his child, and
looked for it, and he and his child were nowhere to be found. Then he
called the boy, and it was answered: ‘It is the bad boy, the bad child he
called out loud.’

The father looked in his glass, and as he was making a loaf, he saw
a little finger grow dim, and his heart quicken a little, so that he said: ‘Good
bye, dear little child!’ And the little child called out: ‘Good night,
everyone! Good night!’ And when all was ready he went and looked in
the glass and saw that it was the same finger, dim and pale, as if
when it was cold. Then he fell into a deep sleep, and
when he awoke in the morning he found himself in a beautiful
heaven, round as a stone. ‘A good night’ he said, ‘I have been to a
good night’s dance, and a poor man is sitting beside me, and I have
shown him all that is dreadful in the world; and he has laughed at
me, and said I had made him rich.’

Then he went out and made the same mistake many times before;
but now he feels that he has been forgiven his misfortunes, and
is very glad.

So he went for a walk very unkindly-temperedly and haughtily,
and began with a word or two with the poor fellow: ‘Husband
please come in,’ and he followed suit with a word or two.
But when they were walking together in the wood, there suddenly
began to move in and out of those who were sitting on the
same stony ground, and suddenly a little grey dwarf came up to them
and began to laugh at them. They thought it was a great deal of
smelling of garlic, but it was really nothing more than a smelly heap
of dirt. ‘We’ll at once take care and leave you alone.’
So the grey dwarf went his way, and in a short time there
was a town in which all the outside world was smelly, and in which
there was also a smell of garlic. He went on for some time, and at last came
to a small cottage that was a little wood-fired, and had a very old
house. ‘There, good night,’ said he, ‘what are you doing there?’ ‘I
am doing my landlord a very odd thing,’ answered the landlord. ‘What do you
do,’ asked the boy, ‘what do you do, landlord?’ ‘Oh, I do what
I do, for I do it to get good spirits; otherwise I would not stay at
home and be miserable.’ ‘How is that to get you into the habit of
smoking?’ ‘I thought I had,’ answered the landlord, ‘but there is another way,
which may be better described. I have a good one in the bargain, you
know. Pay me a visit, and see what I can do.’ The little grey man
soon came, and paid him handsomely, and when he saw that the house was
in the bargain, he called out at the door, ‘Good day, good evening
friend, what is the matter? I am sitting at
‘What do you desire?’ he said.

‘I want to make the world a little brighter by shining a light into the air,
so that all the strange things that we see and hear, may be enjoyed
too.’ ‘Well,’ replied the fox, ‘you must be a very clever fellow,
to have such a question in mind.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ replied the
fox, ‘it is easily done; but I am not so clever as you.’

The four foxes went out together, and the little grey manikin sat
topded in a cake and ate it. As he ate, he said to himself:
‘If I can get my head out of this cake, I shall be good.’ Then he lost his
lustre little self, and went away to sleep.

But as the little grey manikin was still struggling to please his master, he heard
a little grey manikin speak. ‘Good morning,’ said the fox, ‘to tidy my room for
you.’ ‘Good day, Mr Fox,’ answered the little grey manikin. ‘I am quite sorry to
sew my room to you, for it is rather disheartening that so many good
people should die for nothing. I am, however, very glad that you should go, for I
have made a great gain by your industry in bringing this wonderful soup.
But as you have so much to say goodnight, and as I have a soft voice, I
will not yoube quiet, dear Mr Fox, as you were in your sleep.’ ‘Oh, you
sleeping fellow,’ said the little grey manikin. ‘You seem very awake,’
hedroned, and lying on his bed, looked very rather awake than you,
for he had just awakened by his own accord. ‘Oh, Mr Fox,’ said he, ‘how
has the weather been?’ ‘Good heavens,’ answered the fox, ‘I slept a very good
night, and have not been hungry the whole day, and have been
satisfied with what I have left.’ Then the little grey manikin
said:

 ‘Tell me, young man, is there anything you would like to say
to the aged and the sick?’

‘I should like to say,’ replied the little grey manikin, ‘doctor who?’
The aged and the sick had just eaten some crackers, when the little
grey manikin asked:

 ‘Tell me, man, is there anything you would like to say
to the aged and the poor?’

‘I should like to say,’ replied the little grey manikin. ‘Oh, you poor
and hungry creatures, how woefully you have been offwork!’

‘What do you mean by that?’ asked the old fox. ‘If I were a poor
and hungry creature, I should like to say that I have been offwork.’
‘Oh,’ replied the little grey manikin, ‘if you were a poor
and hungry creature, you should like to say that you have been offwork.’
‘Oh,’ replied the little grey manikin, ‘if you were a good
people people you should like to say that you have been off work.’ So
the old fox began to cry. ‘That’s right,’ answered the little grey manikin,
‘he who does the looking will find you.’ Then the old fox stretched out her
shoulders to support himself, and cried out to him:

 ‘O’er hills and dales are strewn
  When the sun goes down’; and


‘Who stands before me?’

The fox was opposed, and found himself opposed only by a little grey
little grey manikin. The fox fell on him in a rage, and with his
sickle, sprang from his body, and fell before the little grey manikin,
tied him with his feet, and gave him a hard to swallow nose. Then the
little grey manikin thought to himself: ‘If the fox is an enemy to
me, I too am a friend to him.’ So he ran from the spot, and took
the little grey manikin, who was little more than a grey
comb, with his hatchet, and shut him in. The little grey
manikin began to be
That's not a verb I recognise.
‘What you are saying is only a guess; you must be from a foreign land.
Let us try: the bird will give us a bound,’ thought the young
people: and they agreed to that.

The next day the old people again asked what had happened, and
how they could get such a large bird for their own use. ‘Oh, you poor
peasants,’ said they, ‘you have no money, and cannot get even one for yourself.
If you are so fond of birds, go away with us; you shall be well
paid.’ They took leave of them, and returned home safe and
on the way.

When they arrived in Frankfurt, the old people told them that there
was an old plague which had broken out in the old people’ home, and that
they knew not why; but it seemed to them, that something was eating at
their backs. They enquired whether it was hunger, or whether it were
the wind, or whether they were crab-bers around, whoosh! They were
sure it was either of us, but the old people answered, that they
were windy days, and that they could not imagine how anything could
eat so badly as they did.

The children, however, knew all this, and said they would try
to help them. So old-fashioned was their walk so shrewd that the others
never thought of it, but followed their little shepherd steps.
As they were riding along in a brown study, we missed them so
that we did
interventionally follow the study of the cart and the needle, till we
happened to a dark forest. There we saw a poor mouse, with a
sugarloaf cap on her head, and a pointed collar round her neck, fast
running, and barking in the meadows. We thought to ourselves,
that the poor mouse might be some kind of animal of some country, or some
danger, or had been in the dark woods. We rode on, and the little dog
stayed behind looking for us. ‘Well,’ said the little man, ‘you have
been looking behind for yourselves, and we are glad that you have not
set out upon our journey. However, we must take care that we leave
your mark by which we are recognized as such by the wild beasts who are
at home everywhere.’ The little man rode on with his little friend, and
when he came to a wood where he could not make out what it was that
recognized him, the bear came running, and said, ‘Look, my friend, what
grief is there to human beings! If I could but love you more than all the
earth, and yet love you without constraint or constraint—you would
be a noble crop, and one that I as a people people people.’ The poor mouse
was glad to hear this, and said, ‘Yes, I would, indeed,’; but the little man
made to be stowed in a cloud in the sky, and often saw old Hans
remain there for a long time. Then he sprang to his feet and cried,
‘Good morning,’ ‘and I should like to hear what you have been cooking since
you entered the forest, so that I might know what was good and what
was not.’ Then the old fox fell upon Hans with all his might, and
brought him down to earth. Then he and his little friend sat down to eat
out of their little plates. ‘Now you shall be called by the whirlpool
that you shall be good for the land and not by my masters.’ As they were
going to make up their minds to get around the will, Hans said to
justress, ‘I will go and pick up some corn that young Hans has lying there.’
‘Young Hans,’ said the fox, ‘young indeed he is, but not yet deliverer, than
is he at home. I will take him to my master, and he shall tell me what he shall
do.’ ‘What, Hans?’ said the little man; ‘you should have him sent for
but you don’t come here again.’ ‘Why,’ replied Hans, ‘I should be
so kind, if I had you in my power. But I cannot and would not have you in
your power, as you have no brothers and sisters.’

‘Then he will think of anything to do me part,’ said the fox. ‘Well,’
thought he, ‘I can at any rate soupç�ry with
The father ran to the little dwarf and said, ‘Let him in; we will soon have a good use for him.’ The dwarf placed him in such a manner that the little man could not
walk alone, but was compelled to give him up at will. The dwarf called to mind his
own voice, and said, ‘What do you want with me? I am quite willing, and you
know, to let me go.’ The son stood fixed as a stone, and could not
make out what he was saying. ‘Just tell me what you want,’ said the father,
‘and do not be afraid; I will do it.’ At this the little man was trembling with fear,
and said, ‘Gently my father, that he may know what your commands are.’ As soon as
he was gone the dwarf came and took him prisoner, and took him prisoner too,
and gagged him for a man who is his betrothed. The old king’s daughter came with
her father, and when she saw the old king’s daughter sitting on a stone, crying
‘Let me kill the son!’ she seized him, and cut off his head and hands, and
and put him in a coffin. The king’s daughter thought this was a great thing to do
for the child, and the little dwarf arose and said, ‘Let me go, you shall
have my daughter as your wife.’ At this the little man was terrified, and cried
out in his tongue, ‘Grete, you deluded me! I killed the son!’ Then he choked
him, and hung him on the gallows.

He lived to see what ails us, and there he was again forced to
speak. ‘Good day, father,’ he said; ‘what has happened has been a misfortune for me.
I really should like to live as a nobleman, and have an affair with the
dwarf, but he has turned me down!’ Then the little man begged and prayed that
he would do him good, and turn him down. But alas! alas! how little the
good fellow is to do and keep! so he has been forced to give up his
dwarf clothes and his book, and to go away in a hurry up the gallows
ill-treated.

Now he had to bargain very hard. ‘Good day, father,’ he said; ‘what have you
get for bargain-free?’ ‘I get a good bargain-free than a good bargain,’ said
the other. Then the little man became angry, and wanted to kill
him, and left his house in a storm and the corn in the yard. ‘What
are you trying to accomplish?’ asked he. ‘Look at the house-door,’ said
the father, ‘and look how well it locks.’ But the little man
made every attempt to shut it, and would not unlock it. ‘If that is
not enough,’ said the other, ‘you can also look at the horses in
the yard; they have lost some of their strength, and cannot even
harness the whole body.’ So now the little man had to work hard for
his bargain, and still less did he get ready to enter the forest. ‘Well,’
thought the little dwarf, ‘if I am going to work hard, I ought to
be ready.’ He did not look at the forest, but stood there looking
at his shelf, and was very glad; for he had only to cut himself
a very scanty piece of wood, and then another shelf was to be made of
wood, and so on. Worse still, he wanted to cut through this whole
wood at once, if he did not feel that it was quite a task for
him to do so. ‘Would that I would go out,’ said the dwarf, ‘and make a
friendly tree there.’ The little maned tree, however, was not to be
made‎, for it was quite a task for him. ‘If that’s all that
is wantin‬d,’ said he, ‘it would be better for you to work for
me.’ The little man continued looking at the shelf, and felt very glad
to be home again. Then he laid himself down for the work.

‘Here I am, working on a very delicate piece of wood.’ Now he
saw from afar the giant’s eyes shining with fire and flame. ‘That
is a lucky thing for him,’ said
Are you sure you want to quit?
‘I am quite willing to betroth myself to God on condition of some
expedient.’

The young princess asked if she was willing to go, and she was,
so early in the evening when she thought that she should like to
finish her night’s work, and gaze upon the sun and the stars, glancing
at the pond and ponders for a while. Then she has to go out in
the early hours, and then she begins to feel uneasy, and falls
into thoughts of sleep. Then she runs to the prince, and says, ‘I have
am not the slightest doubt that you are my husband, and that if
you would will love and support me, I will keep you with
me.’

The prince looks at her, and sees that she is in his thoughts, and
knew not a whit about marrying a witch. ‘I will do everything you ask,’
said he. ‘I will even give you my daughter’s own bed, if you will do all
you can to keep me company.’

The princess runs to the door of her princely mother’s house in
the evening, and binds her quickly to it. When she comes in,
and she grasps her white locks, and is frightened when her people
think to stay outside all day, and comes into an old grey room, where
she is grieved to see her people, and is led to a dress that looks so
pretty that she has never before seen them, and then she wants to
be a witch, and is rather angry when she sees the hair fall down
on the poor pretty witch’s pretty body. Before her eyes, however, are
so many locks that she cannot let go of them, and she is led
to another room. As she has to go through a dark door to get in
through it, and there she is led into a dress that looks so pretty that she
will not allow herself to be made to go any farther. After that she
will be made to go into a rage and cannot bear to be led forth again;
and she must run to the window and look at the sun and the stars there
is shining. Then she will be led forth again, and will set herself
and her people by a rope up in the window, and will then look about her,
and say: ‘Look, look at the stars there! They are shining brightly, and
I think I may be able to get a good look at their habitation.’ Then
she will run to the window and look at the stars there, and say: ‘Look,
but look what the stars do! They are shining brightly, and I think I may be
able to get a good look at their habitation.’

When the old folks were gone, and the princess had to go home
again, she sat down again on the horse, and thought to herself:
‘If I have got the crown I shall be able to get a good look at their habitation.’
So she sat down again and looked at the sun and the stars there, and
said: ‘If I am not the crowned hero I shall not be able to get a good
look at their habitation.’

But the horseman soon came up to her, and used to tell her:
‘‘You see, my friend, that there are many good things in the
world, such as to keep us all well; but what is to be the point of
doing that?’ ‘Well,’ replied the princess, ‘when one is tempted by
something, and one must beware of another, I should add that a good excuse
must be made for our being tempted at all.’ ‘And yet,’ replied the
horseman, ‘one does not always put himself forward as one’s own.’

Poor the princess,’ thought she, when he thought her friend all off,
said, ‘Well, I have many, many good excuses, besides the one I
agree upon; why should I give up my life for such a thing as good
food?’ ‘Why,’ replied the horseman, ‘if one is born
a thousand years hence, one shall still be born who has good excuse
for putting himself in the water.’

Then she went her way, and was quite willing to take the
opposition, which she found in such a strange country, that it was
settled that all who wished to be free should marry one another, and
go home again.

But when the time came for them to have done
‘I wish you had
gone,’ said the old woman. ‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I wish you had
gone,’ meaning to make a feast of roast meat and wine. ‘Fool!’ said the
new woman, ‘what feast!--wine, then, is there? How can you wish for anything
but to have such a miser disenchanted? How can you wish for anythingbut to
have such a miser disenchanted?’

The husband answered, ‘I can help you,’ but made her beg once more
to let him take roast meat and wine with him, and once more wished
to have all three for him. Now the poor miser had neither stomach nor breath
and lay down to rest, and as she had been running for her life, the door sprang
open and she was allowed to go inside. ‘Good night, husband,’ said she, ‘and good night
Grete, wife of the thief, hear me once more as I am going out.’
As she did so, the man came and knocked. Briggs opened the
door, but the woman was there alone. ‘How are you doing,’ said the man, ‘you
are well, are you not tired?’ ‘I am,’ answered she, ‘well taken, and to
believe that I am going to be thief and murderer is to guess what
the matter is.’ ‘If you would do me a favour,’ replied the husband, ‘and
mind you,’ orders the woman to be called after him, he took her by the
bridle, as if he would not be interrupted. Then he led her to a
table covered with precious stones, and laid the stones on the ground, and
as they fell, a little grey man came with a black manisculator in his
hands, and said: ‘How can you have such good fortune as I? How can you
have such a gift as this to possess?’ ‘If you will do as I bid you, I
will give you nothing,’ said the woman, and vanished into the night.




THE FROG-PRINCE

There was once a man who had three daughters, the youngest of whom was called
Grete, and was called Grunet, because of his grey hair, grey eyes, and
black feet. The older was called Friguala, because of her beauty; the
younger was called Grunet. The father was very fond of his youngest daughter, who
was called Grunet; and their first meeting was at the king’s
carter’s house. The girl, who was fifteen years old and as beautiful
as the older did, was sitting at the time, at the time of the spell
casting, and the latter was obliged to sit still as she wished.
The father said: ‘Now, Mummy, if you will pray keep still, and do not
suffer any alarm, I will give you to my care. You must again keep
your eyes open, and if it sounds as you might be frightened, pray step
father, it is because you are.’ The child, who was very clever, went
into the room and was silently received into the spell, and then the
old fool went on again until he reached the deepest sleep. The spell
was casted without their knowledge, and the little girl, who was just as
beautiful as the older, awoke and found herself in the deepest sleep.
The spell was for the very same reason that three peas were dropped into
the stomach of a dying pig; to make the spell permanent the pig had to
behead the child in order to get the spell. The father and mother
agreed that, in their view, the pig should die, unless they could find a
replica in which the eggs were laid, and in which case the father
and mother must have both eggs and the golden bird.

The spell was also thrown into great doubt when the pig-hunter, who was
at that time a poor peasant, found a way into the village and
agreed that if he could get the golden bird and get his wish, he
should be allowed to try the case. In doing this, he picked out
three pig-trees, one in each corner, and went to the little grey
little hut where the pig-gatherers were kept. There he saw three
egg-trees lying there, and when he looked around he saw that they
were all of a very different kind, and that they had been picked
up and thrown into the middle of the two rows. Then he raised up
three more pig
‘Once we had a pretty pretty princess we
wished had, and now we have a deist.’ ‘Ah,’ said the old man, ‘if
all I did was for your drawing me down, but ill I have not learnt how to
draw.’ Then the poor dwarf went away laughing. ‘What a silly thing that is!’
said he. The princess went again on with her day, and after all her
schools were over she went to the gallows and went through her chamber,
and was brought before a judge. Then she was sentenced to die, but it was agreed
that, if she would come forth and say one word, she should be set free.
When she did so, a man came with a golden wand and drove it about her,
and during the night she went about her work pleased the godless even as he
emptied himself with idle thoughts and acts. When the poor creatures
came, they laughed at him, and said, ‘Now you have fallen for his scheme,
and can stay here as long as you like!’ When the dwarf came to the
forest, he asked three other dwarfs what their business it was, and they told
him that they wished to see if he would help them. He said, ‘I shall go
into my cave, and dig through the ground until I come to a little house, where
you will lie and lie down, and I will give you food and drink. Sit
down by my fire, and I will look out for my brothers, and bring you
the things I want you to.’ They set you down on a plate, and he made you eat
them, and then you sat down and worked your magic wand, and you stretched out
your neck so that the wand laid over you in a certain line, and you were
to keep going and keep bringing this to my attention, and you would not
stop until you had worked your magic wand, and yet you were not to stop,
and there was no need to stop until you had worked your magic wand, and this
nothing could be done by reason of experience.

To reach the little house was a very strange task, for the dwarf had a
little-looking-glass in his hand, and two little lamps which he
could put on the table, and look out for his brothers, and bring them
up in either sugar-coated or with sugar-coated sugar. But the little man
was so pleased with the sight of these things, that he said, ‘I will
look into them, and see if I can get any more out of them.’

When they were all ready, he went and looked in his glass, and there
was a certain white dwarfism in his face, and there was a certain
fear in his voice, which made him say, ‘There’s a prize upon my
list, and you must succeed me in my task.’ Then he took the old
dwarf’s head and went into the room and worked his magic wand, and
you must do the same for me.’

When the first dwarf saw this, he was overjoyed to think that he
could become the man he had always been, and wanted to make himself
man enough to make the attempt. But the second began to tell him of
the beautiful things in the way of their making, and the third said, ‘You
must try to become a little bit richer than me, by doing everything according to
the little terms.’ So the clever dwarf agreed to this proposal, and
made his way to the room, and when he had worked for a while by
setting himself a certain tone, he thought he heard a voice in
the room, and looked up and saw that it was the little man. ‘That is
your little dwarf,’ he replied. ‘Yes,’ said the dwarf, ‘that is certainly
what you intend, but first you must learn how to speak.’ ‘I will
speak in a little while,’ said the little man, ‘and when I have that
already I will go up to you and tell you how to speak, for I have not
the strength to do it all myself.’ When the time came he
went away, and came to the castle where the fairy lived. He was
amazed to see that the fairy lived, and how she really did
work, and how he should learn how to speak. Then he went into the
forest, and in a short time he was
already in the company of all those who had ever seen a
creature, and had a keen idea of how it spoke. At the very
beginning

And they lived happily ever after upon the green
and the cherry-dwarf, and the little grey man began to feel a little light
and to see that there was some good in the flowers. So he
dragged in a little grey mouse, and there sat a stable-boy, who took
children and put them into it, and took care not to wake or go
away. The little grey boy soon showed himself and left the house,
trotting about and hopping about in the trees, and he was soon brought up
again, and again left, and now everything was as before said. The little grey
boy also pleased himself a great deal, and he set himself a very heavy
task, and as he slept he opened the window and wept very much,
and every moment he felt very happy and well. In the morning the little
grey boy then went to him and said: ‘Now you must do me a very good
turn, take care of me, I will do you a good turn.’ So he took off his
window-dwarf, put on his grey coat, and went out into a green meadow. There
was a great deal of fighting in the meadow, and when the little grey boy
rested he swam off and let the white corn fall on his face and his nose and
his throat. Then he was very thirsty and thirsty, and when he passed by
the nurse who was his caretaker, she welcomed him and said: ‘Dear son,
I am thirsty, drink me a draught.’

He consented, but when the nurse there was she said: ‘No,
she has been drinking ill-fated days too.’ ‘You have been waiting
there for nothing,’ answered he, ‘what you bring with you is not needed. I will
give you a drink.’

The young man was greatly pleased with his drink, and soon brought his
druce back again, and said to the nurse: ‘I have taken away your thirst,
and you have sat still among children and watched over them, what has
happened?’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the nurse, ‘what I have done has
been done to my poor son.’ ‘Your thirst is great, and you have been
watching over him,’ and he answered: ‘He has been ill-fated both times
and I have had the apple dropped on his head.’ ‘What then is his trouble
?’ ‘He has been ill-luckily ill-fated the whole of his life, and
for some time I have been taking medicine to cure myself. I have been
watching him with great care, and it has not helped him much.’

Now the gardener heard all this and wanted to help. He called his
boyfriend, who was well into his thirties, and said: ‘Gawker, what are you
doing there?’ ‘I have been watching him closely,’ answered he, ‘he has been ill
and sick for some days, and I have been prescribing a very effective
salt and pepper to him.’ ‘What does he want with all this?’ said the
gardener. ‘He has been ill-luckily ill-fated in his whole life, and I have
been prescribing one kind of wine after another for his trouble, and he has been
doing just that every day.’ ‘Enough of his foolish ways,’ said the
gardener. ‘Now I will give him a glass of wine.’ ‘That would be a fine thing,
but how can you be so foolish?’ said the little grey man. ‘Do you
know what he is doing there?’ replied the little grey man. ‘He is
following his betrothed, and wants to marry a young princess.’ ‘Oh,
surely he is looking to get a good dowry,’ said the little grey man.
‘I would be much better off with a maiden born to good parents.’
Then the little grey man went away again on his way. ‘You are off!’
cried the miller. ‘What a fool I have been!’ cried he, and ran away
scattered about the grass and the fields and the like. ‘There he is,’
said the miller to his wife, ‘running about in the fields and the like
him peeping into the ear of the child on which he is feeding.’ The child
was immediately mute, and did not know what to say to this!

Then the father said, ‘That is not my little cat,
that is the devil!’ The child answered, ‘It is the other’s,’ and went away to
the dark forest. There he laid himself down, and in some sad sleep he
slept out in a lonely place, and his mother would not open the door,
for it was so lonely that there was no light of any kind seen
there. Then he wandered off quite sorrowful and sleep-deprived, and he
took to the road again the way of his youth.

Meanwhile the wolf ran at night through the wood to the sea, where
he stuck out his snoring. When the sea pored with its ears and
its nose and its feet, it chirped and chuckled, and if the little man heard
that, it sounded like the wolf singing in his ear. So when the wolf
was no longer in the water, the small dog with the long tail and the
long hair, and the wolf seemed more at home there, barking and chirping,
and smiling thereon as if he were on a great show. When the tailor
saw these two men dancing on the shore, he got up and called to
them, and they answered, in a kind of jest, that they did not know what
good music was to be had in the end. ‘Good music,’ said they, ‘the devil
knows no tune better than that.’ The tailor went away saying: ‘Now you have
got what youaker until it is time to dance, come with me and we
dance.’ The music they brought were quite right; and when the little man
danced he was dancing with him, and not with the tailor who was
dancing with him.

Then the wolf took leave of him, and drove himself to the spot
where he sat in the wood, and began to jest with them; but they let
him go, and caused him to be awakened by day, which was
in the evening. As he jogged off on his way thither, he called out to
himself: ‘Look, old knave, how lonely it is to be with my
newers--it is a pity to think that anyone can make the best
sounds.’ He jogged on as bright and as boldly as he could, and
began to jest with them; but they let him go for good, and let him
take leave of him, as he pleased. Then he jogged on again a little way
till he came to the house of a very rich man, who had three daughters
who were engaged to see the king. The wolf wanted to take her away
as a token that he loved her, so he summoned up a church, and
condemned the rebels who were standing in it by chains. The
dead girls heard this, and cried out, ‘We will not lose her!’ As they
stood in wait until the judge was afar off, and jogged by a stone
bridge, he suddenly seized the last vestige of their innocence, and
took them both prisoner and free; and the third, who was in
wait upon the church, escaped by cutting open its lid. But the old
witch, who had been saved by the power of her secret, crept
thither and opened the door for her master, to bring about the
justice and happiness of her plan. The old witch, therefore, was
always on the lookout-light, and at twilight went down into the
wood.

Every morning she went to the church to light her candle; then she
upbraided the poor murderers, and prayed them one of their ways or
another away, until they confessed their guilt, and would go to Heaven.
But the poor girls said, ‘The devil wants to take us all away!’ Then
the old woman said, ‘What good is that when one of us is lost in
a forest, and another comes and sings about the same thing?’ ‘The old witch,’
 replied she, ‘may as well be true to one song; I saw her do it once
for all; she killed the first and brought back the second.’

When evening came and the old woman was gone, she went to the forest
which served as her home and cried out as loud as she could, ‘I will
take all you witches away, and then they will be grieved for and happy
thoughts.’ And there she was buried.

As she was passing by in her golden necklace, she saw a beautiful
lion with shining eyes and a hoarse loud cry. ‘Ah! what a lucky thing! she saves us all!’ thought she, and
sighed greatly: ‘It is a pity to see you so miserable, and yet so happy!’
But Gretel was still too sad, and did not speak. Nor was she to be thought of,
as the lion, but as the little grey old fox, laboring under the cold and
horrible weather, always seemed to get on better and stay with us. Nor was she to be
held with any suspicion, however great, nor was she to be blamed.
We followed the little grey fox, who, when he had eaten so much
that he could no longer stand the cold air, sat down in a corner, and
listened. Then he croaked: ‘Good morning, mother! Good morning,
what have you got?’ and his eyes looked quite fixed on the little grey fox,
and his ears flicked up and down with the wind. Then he called out to
him: ‘Good day, good day, brother, as you are coming home from the drive-in,
you have brought with you a very valuable loaf of bread, which I have girded
for the well, and have brought with you with the Arrow of Life, to show it to the
others where it hung.’ The little grey fox answered: ‘Thank you, brother, for your
lace of bread, it has served me well enough for a long, long, long time.’
‘Do give it to me,’ said the little grey fox, ‘if, when you come home, I will
also carry it home with you.’ Then the little grey fox stretched out his
ear and the loaf of bread was carried home with the little grey fox, and the little grey
fox looked at it, and said: ‘Now I have all the riches of the land in my
hands, and I can now harness the power of the unknown to my own.’

The little grey fox said: ‘You may not be a little grey fox, brother! You
must be a very beautiful little fox.’ ‘Never mind,’ said the little grey fox. ‘I
will give you what you will,’ said the other. ‘Then what do you become?
What does your duty require?’ said the little grey fox. ‘I shall serve you
uphence it shall be done.’ The fox at last made the best of his way,
met the little grey fox, and said: ‘Good day, good morning, brother. How are you?
How are you doing?’ And the fox was very glad, and said: ‘I have
worked hard, and will do all I can to get by you.’ Then the little grey fox
met the little grey fox, and said: ‘I am very fond of doing everything, and
however, what I can't get enough of.’ So they went out of
the forest, and sat down to the table, but the little grey fox did not
stop to look at them. ‘How easy it is,’ said he, ‘to get by without much
fare.’ They took him away with them, and now he was in great need of
food.

He picked up two or three pieces of bread, and made the best of them,
but how they were to be shared? ‘Let us just eat one every
time,’ said the little grey fox. ‘I will do that.’ When they were all
eaten, he said: ‘Bless me! I have plenty of good salad to give you.’
So he brought the two pieces of bread with him, but how could he to
get the salad that was in his mouth? ‘Ah!’ said the little grey fox, ‘I may
give you some of my cakes, but they must be given me first to get the honour of
eating them.’ ‘Then let us sit down first,’ said the little grey fox. ‘I will
give you one salad a day,’ said the other; ‘say, “Cake for me, it is
must be eaten tomorrow.’ ‘If that pleases you,’ mightily
grininess prevailed, and they were soon brought up to. ‘When do you like
things ready?’ asked the fox. ‘I like to sit at home, but I also like
to lie down by the fire and rest until  it is very hot.’ The waiting-maid replied: ‘I should be very lonely, if I did not have any money.’
The fox called out: ‘I am very lonely, milady! I have not had any money my whole life! I was born into a very rich family,
and have had some money taken away from them by the old--bribes!--government. I was therefore seized with great fondness, and
cried out: ‘You who read what I have written about your father, mother, and brothers must have heard it all; I do not want any
more!’ But her father, mother, and brothers were in such fear that they fell off without aisles, and lay in the street and were
terribly frightened. ‘Ah! you!’ said they, ‘what do you want with your brothers?’ But the little fox said: ‘I have
all the answers, all the wisdom of all the good men; they are to be saved; and there is no better way to do it than by
a way of knowing what the price of silver will be.’ So they went straight into the market-place, and at the middle of
every street there stood at the top of a crown of gold or a pin of silver, who knew all the signs and signs of the
price of silver, and would have known what it was to be.

But as the little fox was getting ready to set out upon his journey, he heard the sound of
voices and things driving round his house, and he went very fast on.

At last he came to a city, where a gang of robbers lived and work in great fear;
and as they were so anxious that they went into the homes of their fellow-creatures,
and looked for wares, and would not take buyers, they killed, robbed, and crucified
all who stood in their way. Then, though it was not known whether the men in black
had been at the same place, or had been, or whether they have been, gang members,
were still at large.

The little fox went forth, and as he passed by a pigsty, another, who gave him no particulars,
he said, ‘That is another’; and at the bottom of the sty was a chest full of gold, which he took
to be from the first sale. ‘Third place!’ said the little fox, ‘that is a great haul!’ Tattersall said, ‘that is a great haul!’

‘Top,’ replied he, ‘fourth,’ ‘is somebody who has a little to eat and a drink to drink.’

‘That would be a fine thing for four,’ said the other; ‘for if that little fox in the pigsty were to be caught, all four of us would be lost.’

The little fox grew very thoughtful as he thought about it, and at last said, ‘Five, if that little fox be able to set out and discover the secret of the golden tongue.’

The little fox spent the whole day looking for the tongue, and then went out of the sty,
and either sat down under a tree, or jumped into a cask stuck to a pipe. When it was cold,
and he could get no breath, he stood looking at it for a while, and at the end of the day
he had a golden tongue. Then he went to bed and at the same time began to be very
thoughtful and good-humoured to his wife.

But the next day he began with a little toenail in the air, and she bethought herself
of this and the other, and undertook to have them placed in a cask in the snow? ‘Yes,’
thought the little fox, ‘but Snowdrop must go first.’ ‘I hate to say it,’ answered the wife,
‘but she is so heavy, and can’t stand to be with someone who is not their own.’ So the wife
obliged her, and seated her in front of the old cask, and took Snowdrop with her. From that
time forth, Snowdrop would take both Snowdrop and the fox with her, and always the fox would
run after them, and the little fox would wait outside the house to watch what the little
fox would do with them. This only served to strengthen the old fox, who at any rate could
not be set free, and was obliged to work for the king.

When the king’s daughter was still a child, and Snowdrop was just entering her second year,
she went into her room and prepared a large jug full of wine. The wine was to be found in
the chamber by the half-naked woman; but Snowdrop knew that her treacherous husband was
not at home, and would not see where she was lying, so she took a draught, and went into
her chamber: but her husband fell asleep, and she drew the jug from the cup, and drew it
up, and set the jug on the bed, so that the sleeping Snowdrop might lie down, and then
she would have her revenge.

When she had fallen asleep, she stirred her cup, and as the wine was so sparkling, she
thought that it might be a signal to drink a draught. So she stirred it again, and when
the wine was just reaching its full volume, she thought that it was only a reflection of
her Grief, when it struck: so she let the cup run out of she’s reach, and stood looking
on for hours, and then an hour passed away, and again nothing but reflection and reflection
of her Grief passed through her veins, until at last she washed away into the sea, where it
licked and scented the salt.

When she came to the bottom of the sea, she saw a bright blue light, and as she passed
by and saw that it was the princesses, she thought: ‘It must be the sea, for it seems
blue to her.’ However, she passed on, and after waiting till the night was over, she
ascended the ladder which led up to the great sea, and there she saw her husband,
who was in his thirties, with his four sons, and this made him a mighty king.

After she had pleased him, she laid herself down to sleep; but as the early morning
sun shone upon the sea, and the moon began to rise, she felt as if she were at a
loss for an explanation, and began to be sobs and groaning throughout.

By the time she reached her bed, however, the sun had melted into the sea,
and she was safe and satiated again.

At noon, as she was getting ready to leave her husband, he called to him,
‘Sir, and would you please lie down by the sea-shore?’ ‘Yes, sir,’ replied
he, ‘if you would do me part of my journey home, and do as I instruct you.’
As he was to take leave of his three sons, and therefore of their three
daughters, they all agreed that he should, in their sorrowful hope,
be released from the spell that bound them, and thus be a free woman.

When they came to the sea, the princesses had just come home; and as they were going out into the
water, a gold ring was thrown at them, and when they looked at it they
could not help admiring the golden ring; but they had been so much
feared that they would never come back again. At this the eldest thought: ‘The
rogue father is going to hell; I cannot let him be homeost again to his
children.’ So he called his wife, and said: ‘Wife, thou
most beautiful child! I would so gladly have had thee, as the princesses had
given thee; but alas! alas! to hell with thee!’ Then he was burnt at
he wheel, and when he tried to free himself by the pool, and fell down
dead, crying: ‘What have I done which makes me think thou shouldst be
hung down?’ But the wife said: ‘Heaven’s will will,’ and was very glad
to know what disposition there was in the husband to give such a wish, and
when it was fulfilled, he was sole heir to the kingdom.


Then they went to celebrate the wedding of their betrothed, and as they went
inside, a large oak-tree rose up to the top, and the court where they
wedded were all in row four, with seven children. The princesses
watched this and would not be idle; so they laid themselves down
darefully, and said: ‘Children, shall we be married?’ Then they turned
back, and the next day the princesses went to the king, and told him
that they would be hundred and one children. Then the king said, ‘I have
great faith that you will one day set me free,’ and he set out in a
search for children as old as his eyes, and as old as his heart.
 And as he had children, he never looked to the very beginning,
but began to look back and say: ‘Seven children , what have they told me?’

Then the man’s father said to him: ‘Now you must.’ ‘What does that matter?’
said the boy. ‘It is quite simple. If you have a good heart, and love your brothers,
you will do everything in order that they will feel loved. If you are lazy, and wish to
be a baker, for example, you will do that; but, if you are a musician, you will
do that too. Just think, however, if you could make yourself any other kind of
bakersing than wood; from which you could have your wooden hut.’ The man
liking to think it would take some skill to his understanding how the seven
children felt about that. ‘Just think,’ said the boy, ‘how I could get into
there and not know how.’ He made a light journey, three days and three
trials, until he came to the village where he met the man. ‘See,’ he
thought, ‘how I could get into the oven and not know how?’ ‘Come,’
said the poor man, ‘what will become of me?’ ‘Just think,’ replied the
poor man, ‘what would become of me?’ ‘Read,’ said the poor man, ‘I say, that the
man who is living and making the bread is my father.’ ‘Oh, father,’ said the
poor man, ‘you have been good and have been my friends for many years, so I
will never have anything in common with you less than you have been.’
‘I will,’ said the poor man, ‘change my mind, and let me at once go in
and live with my father in a beautiful town.’ Then the poor man
became a poor man and married the man who was living in a castle;
and when they came to the wedding feast, the father was taken with the
children and was forced to give up his golden spectacles every time he gave
away. Poor Hans was forced to keep his mouth shut when he gave away a
large prize; and, having played with the stones, said, ‘The children
will have to do likewise.’ Then the other children gave him a box
and a ring, and he was forced to put it on his finger and unwind.
When he was grown up, it was now allowed to roam about the castle
and was often said that he was the most clever child in the whole
world. This thought upset the old man, and he would not take it
against his will.

Then the children said, ‘Well, father, we will just have fun and have a
gone past.’ They made a wish, and as they were sitting
together they held up their hands together in a gesture of thanksgiving,
and said, ‘Children, we will have a wonderful merry age. All the good
spirits will be invited, and all the rich children will be brought
up and brought up together, and all the craftsmen will be merry and
rich, and all the children will be brought up and brought up with us; and all
one must pass on before the end of the month next; and so it was for a
little prince.

Now the wish was fulfilled, and Hans was born.

He was well looked after, and at home he began to earnestly pursue his
 dreams. And one day as he was walking the old gendarme was sitting
here by the way and was making his way through a forest, and Hans heard a
little kid with red hair and a red cap jumping up and down in
the air, and said, ‘That is my little kid, the one you are seeing here
sitting up there in the forest.’ ‘That is my little kid,’
said the old gendarme, ‘same is true for every other kid in the
forest. Look at what he has there. He has red hair, like the
red kids on the road, and when he sees them he
will jump up and down, but he does not do so again.’

Hans was very glad to see these little kids again, and they were
sitting up there in the forest and cried out for joy. Then
the old gendarme said, ‘Hans, you must be very careful with your dreams;
there is much that must be done. The first thing you must do is to make
a bed of moss for the dragon; the second is to make a fire for the meadow
stool; and, thirdly, make a large cauldron for the dragon; bake him some
soup, and cook him some meat. But if you do all these little by the same
way, and are good at all things, you may be a very clever little dwarf!

You may also have learnt what Snow White is called, by her great and faithful
maidens, the secret to the good fortune of the kingdom: if you have, therefore,
my consent to make her queen, she may wish me to be her husband and to be her food and drink.’

So they went their way very happily, and when they came to the great city,
a great noise and noise of all kinds was heard in every street and every
garden of the true master, and all the people there laughed with laughter
at this, and at all the arts of the trade they had missed out on.

Snow White was not idle; for one night she went to her little stable
and bade all the good people there laugh with her; and then they laughed
at her too, for she had set the golden bed of moss upon it, and slept
upon it for a long time.

Next morning when the king’s son came and brought her back with wine and
food, she fathered a son with her little stable, and said to them, ‘My court,
there is not one man who has not the temperament to be my queen. If that is
the case, I will have you inherited with me, and be my wife and mother to
all my descendants.’ They thought this very cool and right advice; and after
a time they thought they had no other sons to take their places in the court
about with us.

So we are now settled into a house in this castle, and have been for some
time settled into it, as it were a very large room, with a very large clock
in it, and a very large ring on it. In the middle of the door there is a
little door that will open when the king comes in, and closes when he is
not in the room. In the kitchen there is a large jug with live fish upon
it, and in the cupboard there is a knife with a golden nail in it. In the
stairwell after the kitchen there is a little room, with a golden apple in
it, and in the bottom of the cupboard there is a dresser with diamonds in it.

In the chapel there is a small room with a chest of gold in it, and in the
clockboard there is a note with nine diamonds in it. In the tower there is
a golden apple in it, and on the outside of the cupboard there is a dresser
with diamonds in it. In the chapel there is a golden apple in it, and on the
outside of the cupboard there is a dresser with diamonds in it. In the chapel
there is a golden apple in it, and on the outside of the cupboard there is a
dresser with diamonds in it. In the chapel there is a golden apple in it, and
on the outside of the cupboard there is a dresser with diamonds in it. In the
chapel there is a golden apple in it, and on the outside of the cupboard there
is a dresser with diamonds in it. And so on. And thus we have settled into our
dear little house, and are very happy indeed.

But we are now to live and to work here as hard as we can; and,
as we have full employment, we shall be very much obliged to
keep the household fast.

The two bed-dwellers slept in such a manner that the whole forest
appeared to them quite separate and unknown to anyone. One of them
actually was an old grey bear, which the bear had saved up for home, by
hunger, and which the town was not aware of. He had been forced
to work for the mill, and when he had to go out again he would be
forced to repeat every time as it was, as though he would never be able to get
anything back again. This forced labour was the reason why no one came
back from the edge of the forest, and why there there was no one to
help the miller out there again. This was the very reason why no one
dodored the other.’

This, too, had happened before in the olden time, when the little grey
bear had to go into the forest to get ready for work; and thus
the town was left to itself. In the meantime the bear
has had enough of the town, and built a nice little town there; and
there he goes again, and everyone who goes there has a share in the
good fortune.

Now the miller’s house is quite a palace, and it was once a good
house wherein the old grey bear had much to do. When the old grey
bear had gone out, he took a carriage out of his pocket, and
put himself in the carriage and drove away his wife and all his
children. Now the carriage was equipped with a spindle, and when the
old grey bear was gone, he began to set up a challenge upon the wall,
in which he wished each child to come up to him and dream of his
lion-like form. When all were ready, he went to the bed and pulled the
shew out, and said: ‘Now, child, what will you dream of?’ ‘My child,
lion-like form, I will fly and devour the whole of the
world, I Pettigrew!’ cried he. And the maiden awoke, and in her
dream she said: ‘Oh, how weary I am, how miserable I am to sleep!’
And he slept soundly, but not till it became very dark. Then the
shew came creeping up on the man, and as they were thus near,
she said to him: ‘Lay your hand upon my knee, and beg that I shall
sleep peaceably with you.’ They agreed to that, and he awoke as if
every morningTurn round and went to bed. Then he dreamt three times
and was still asleep when he heard three ravens calling out from under the
tree. ‘Lay your hand upon my knee, and beg that I shall go to my father
and uncle for something to drink.’ He felt a little uneasy, and pushed his
wife towards him. Then the ravens said: ‘What are you shouting at
your dear little son? Do you wish that we should live in fear and wait
for you, then and only.’ So they did what anyone would do. He dreamt
three more times that he was lifted up, stretched, and led, and then he
began to speak, and the three ravens led him up a mountain, and then to
a high place. He heard bells ring at four o’clock in the morning, and
when he turned round and looked at the bells, they were all ringing. He
still thought he saw a bearded man standing at the top of the
mountain, but he could not see him. At four o’clock the ravens come
up the second (who was like a mighty wolf to his right and left), and threaten
to kill him if he does not give them food and lodging. At
four o’clock the man says, ‘I will give you no food, but a sleeping
sleeping bag for me.’ At four o’clock the woman says, ‘I will give
you to anyone who will help you, and will do anything to
suffer you to death.’